
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07514/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2020                   |On 9 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  refer  to  him.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Henderson) (hereinafter referred to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who, in a determination  promulgated  on  the  24  April  2019,
    dismissed his protection claim.

The factual background:

 3. The background to the Appellant's protection claim is set  out  in  the
    determination of the FtTJ at  paragraphs  10-14  and  in  the  decision
    letter of the Secretary of State issued on 6 June 2018.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Iraq. He left Iraq with his family on 20
    August 2017 and entered Turkey. He was separated from  his  family  and
    claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on 20 November 2017 and made
    an application for asylum and/or humanitarian protection.

 5. His claim was that he was  born  in  Tuz  Khurmatu  in  the  Salahuddin
    province and is of Kurdish ethnicity. His father was a low-level member
    of the Peshmerga and the KTP and was involved in the battle with the Al-
    Hashad Al-Shaabi also known as the "PMF".  The  appellant's  home  area
    became unsafe for Kurds and the appellant's  father  decided  that  the
    family should leave the area and go to Turkey.

 6. The family left Iraq together but was separated when they were  put  in
    the back of lorries to leave Iraq. The appellant claimed to have had no
    contact with his parents or siblings and had not been able  to  contact
    them since he came to the United Kingdom.

 7. The appellant managed to contact his maternal uncle through Facebook in
    January 2018 and his CSID was brought in person to the appellant via  a
    friend of his uncles who was  travelling  to  the  United  Kingdom.  He
    received this document in March 2018. He had not been able  to  contact
    his uncle.

 8. The appellant's case was that he  believed  he  would  be  arrested  or
    detained on return to Iraq and was not in touch with any family members
    thus would not have any support should he be returned.

 9. It is also recorded that he relied upon the CSID and did not accept the
    respondent's analysis of that document was not genuinely  issued.  That
    document gave a date of birth in xxx 2001.

10. In a decision letter dated 6 June 2018 the Respondent refused his claim
    for asylum. It was accepted that he was  a  national  of  Iraq  and  of
    Kurdish ethnicity. The decision letter began  by  considering  his  age
    having claimed he was born in xxx 2001. However, it was considered that
    he had failed to produce any satisfactory evidence to substantiate  his
    claim. The decision letter referred to the  CSID  which  the  appellant
    relied upon but that it had been examined and assessed by a  specialist
    unit which concluded that the document had not  been  genuinely  issued
    and was a "stolen blank". After full examination, it was found that the
    document could not  be  relied  upon  as  evidence  of  nationality  or
    identity and that  the  CSID  could  not  have  been  produced  by  the
    competent Iraqi issuing  authority  responsible  for  the  issuance  of
    genuine Iraqi ID cards. The  appellant  was  therefore  treated  as  an
    adult.

11. The  decision  letter  considered  that  he  did  not  have  a  genuine
    subjective fear on return to Iraq. As to his claim that he would be  at
    risk from the PMF due to his father's involvement in the Peshmerga  and
    the KDP, the respondent did not accept that he had given a credible  or
    consistent claim. In particular  at  paragraph  33,  he  had  not  been
    consistent as to the description of his father having claimed  that  he
    was a high-ranking member of a party but in his asylum interview having
    stated that he was a low level member of the Peshmerga and KDP.

12. The appellant's claim that his father joined the KDP and the  Peshmerga
    when he was seven years of age was considered. He had  stated  that  he
    had no involvement and that he was not specifically targeted by the PMF
    or the authorities in Iraq. The appellant claimed that his  father  was
    the target however the respondent  concluded  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to demonstrate that either he or his family had encountered  any
    personal threat, adverse interest or any persecution from the  PMF.  It
    was also noted that the family did not approach the authorities in  the
    IKR and there was no attempt made to relocate within Iraq.

13. As to his claim that his father was involved in a  battle  and  injured
    his leg and that the area was no longer safe, consideration  was  given
    to the COI request Iraq-nonstate armed  groups  security  -  Kurds  (12
    April 2018) which made reference to the situation in Tuz Khurmatu. That
    evidence stated that there had been conflict in the  area  between  the
    Peshmerga and the PMF but that the appellant had not demonstrated  that
    his father was personally targeted which added further  weight  in  the
    lack of motive and interest in the appellant and his family.

14. In summary, whilst it was accepted  there  had  been  conflict  in  Tuz
    between the Peshmerga and PMF, it was not accepted that this placed him
    at risk or that he was personally targeted or that there be any  motive
    or interest in him.

15. The respondent considered the issue of  sufficiency  of  protection  in
    Iraq and whether internal relocation was a viable option.

16. Consideration was also given to Article 15 (c)  in  the  light  of  the
    country guidance decisions in AA (Article 15 (c ) Iraq  CG  [2015]  KUT
    544 as amended by the Court of Appeal in AA Iraq v SSHD[2017] EWCA  Civ
    944 and AAH (Iraqi Kurds-internal  relocation)  CG  [2018]  UKUT  0212.
    Specific consideration was given to documentation  and  feasibility  of
    return  (excluding  the  IKR)  and  internal  relocation  within   Iraq
    including the IKR.

17. When considering the issue of return, the  appellant  had  claimed  not
    know where his family currently were  but  last  saw  them  in  Turkey.
    However, he also stated that he was in contact with his uncle  who  was
    currently living in Kirkuk. The respondent considered the reasons given
    as to why he could not live with his uncle and attempt to  relocate  to
    the IKR. The appellant claimed that his uncle was struggling to support
    himself and he could not return because he was still a  child.  As  the
    age assessment completed concluded he was an adult aged 24 and that  he
    was unable to give an adequate extra nation  as  to  why  he  would  be
    unable to live in the IKR and therefore he could  relocate  within  the
    IKR area and establish contact with his extended family in Iraq. It was
    further  considered  that  he  had  failed  to  demonstrate  that   the
    authorities  of  Iraq  would  be  unable  or  unwilling  to  offer  him
    protection if he sought it. It was noted that he claimed his father was
    working for the Peshmerga and therefore it was reasonable for  them  to
    offer protection. However, it was not accepted that he would be at risk
    on return and that the PMF  was  seeking  to  harm  him  and  therefore
    sufficiency of protection was not required.

18. The decision letter considered  internal  relocation  at  paragraph  57
    onwards and having considered the issue of relocation to the IKR it had
    not been shown that it would be unreasonable to expect him to return to
    Kirkuk, Sulaymaniyah or Diyala or another location in Iraq. As to being
    able to obtain a CSID, it was considered that he could obtain his  CSID
    as he claimed his solicitor was in possession of it  alternatively  you
    could access the civil status affairs offices in the IKR. As he had  an
    uncle and aunt in Iraq and had recently been contact with his uncle, he
    had a genuine familial relationship with his uncle  who  could  support
    him on return to Iraq. He had skills but he could utilise upon return.

19. His claim was therefore refused on all grounds.

20. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal against that decision came before the FtTJ on the 10 April  2019
    and in the decision  promulgated  on  24  April  2019  his  appeal  was
    dismissed.

21.  The FtTJ set out her findings of fact at paragraphs 40-60. They can be
    summarised as follows:

      a) The appellant was from Tuz Khurmatu which was not within the IKR as
         erroneously suggested at paragraph 64 of the  decision  letter  but
         was a town 50 km to the south of Kirkuk and is  therefore  from  an
         area which was  categorised  as  a  "contested"  area  of  Iraq  in
         accordance with the country guidance ) at [40]).

      b) As to the CSID he had produced, the FtTJ  considered  the  document
         examination report and at [47] set out the  difficulties  with  the
         report as well as the anomalies found in the document  itself.  The
         judge recorded at [48] that the appellant's statement  referred  to
         his solicitor having sought verification of the document but  there
         was no information as to efforts made to verify the document.

      c) As to how the appellant obtained this document, he claimed that  he
         had obtained it from his uncle based in Kirkuk having made  contact
         by Facebook. The judge recorded that the  information  provided  on
         the appellant's uncle was "sparse" and the Facebook  page  had  not
         been provided and the appellant claimed he had  not  been  able  to
         contact his uncle as he had not  been  online  for  some  time  and
         referred to trying in June,  August,  September  and  October.  The
         appellant explained that his family had not left Iraq with all  the
         documents as his mother had left documents with his uncle in Iraq.

      d) At [51] the judge concluded  that  taking  all  the  evidence  into
         account, he concluded that the  appellant  had  not  been  truthful
         about his real age.

      e) The judge also concluded that it was not reasonably likely that his
         mother would leave essential identity documents with his uncle when
         the family were intending to travel  from  Kirkuk  to  Turkey.  The
         judge  noted  that  the  CG  case  of  AAH  referred  to   frequent
         checkpoints and the need to show identity. At paragraphs  41  -  44
         there was detailed reference to the concerns of the IKR authorities
         regarding those entering the IKR and to the importance of having  a
         CSID wherever an individual is in Iraq. At paragraph 120 there  was
         reference to the concern about infiltrators  in  the  IKR  and  the
         decision also referred to the need for a CSID to access employment,
         housing and services. The judge rejected the appellant's claim that
         simply being able to speak Kurdish Sorani would be enough.

      f) The judge rejected his account of not having to  show  document  at
         any point during the journey of his account and his account of  not
         knowing whether the family travelled through  the  IKR  to  get  to
         Turkey. Given that much  of  the  north-west  of  the  country  was
         insecure due to the presence of ISIS it  would  not  be  reasonably
         likely that the family would travel with their CSID documents which
         showed their place of origin and the ethnicity.

      g) At [56] the judge recorded that the appellant had contact with  one
         family member his uncle living  in  Kirkuk  and  that  he  did  not
         presently have a CSID which was accepted as genuine. The judge  did
         not find it reasonably likely that his  uncle  would  have  had  no
         information about his family bearing in mind that his  uncle's  use
         of Facebook and secondly, that he remained in the same location  as
         far as the appellant was aware  and  thirdly,  when  the  appellant
         stated that the events which occurred in Turkey happened six months
         before he  contacted  his  uncle.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
         "appellant has not been straightforward about his knowledge of  his
         family's  current  whereabouts  or  contact  with  members  of  his
         family."

      h) As to return, the judge considered the country guidance case of AAH
         (illegal Kurds-internal relocation) Iraq CG 2018) UK duty 00212 and
         that all present returns were to Baghdad. The judge found  that  he
         was from a contested area of Iraq  and  could  not  return  to  Tuz
         Khurmatu.

      i) As to Kirkuk, the FtTJ stated that she was aware from  other  cases
         that Kirkuk was no longer under the control of the  Kurdish  forces
         and it came under the control of the Iraqi army  in  October  2017.
         The appellant had not mentioned this as a reason for  being  unable
         to locate his uncle and did not refer to his uncle  moving  out  of
         Kirkuk (see [58]).

      j) The judge found that he would need to obtain  his  CSID  or  a  new
         document as the document provided was not a reliable one. The judge
         also recorded that she was  not  provided  with  information  about
         where the appellant's  relevant  civil  registry  office  would  be
         located and obtaining his CSID would be dependent on  contact  with
         family members in Iraq or the IKR. The judge recorded at [59]  that
         she did not accept the appellant had been straightforward about his
         family members and his contact with them. The judge was unclear  as
         to why contact with his uncle would not  have  been  maintained  by
         other means even if Facebook was not possible.  If  his  uncle  had
         left Kirkuk it would not prevent him from  maintaining  a  Facebook
         account. The judge concluded that the appellant was  likely  to  be
         aware of his family whereabouts and it would be possible for him to
         obtain  copies  of  his  father's  documentation  to  assist   with
         alternative documentation should it be necessary.

      k) In the alternative the  judge  concluded  that  it  was  reasonably
         likely that his family were aware of the whereabouts  of  his  CSID
         and could assist in providing this  for  him.  He  would  have  the
         alternative of internal relocation to  the  IKR  as  he  can  speak
         Kurdish Sorani, he is of Kurdish ethnicity  and  is  of  the  Sunni
         religion. He has no health problems and his  education  is  limited
         and has no employment history.

      l) When  considering  the  option  of  living  in  Baghdad,  the  FtTJ
         considered that that option in  the  long  term  presented  serious
         risks for the appellant; he does not speak Arabic and has no family
         support or links to Baghdad, he is Kurdish  and  is  also  a  Sunni
         Muslim. The FtTJ  referred  to  the  decision  in  BA  (returns  to
         Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] which referred to the additional risks  for
         those who are Sunni Muslims relocating to Baghdad  and  highlighted
         the risk of kidnapping for those who return to Iraq.

      m) The judge finally concluded that his return was dependent upon  his
         ability to obtain a CS ID and internally relocate which  the  judge
         found to be feasible.

      n) The FtTJ's assessment under Article 8 is set out at [61]  and  that
         the appellant could not meet the Rules and that there were no  very
         significant obstacles to his re-integration.   The  FtTJ  therefore
         dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

22. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and granted and on the 30
    May 2019 by FtTJ Swaney.

23. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper Tribunal. Ms Cleghorn,
    who appeared before the FtTJ, appeared on behalf of the  appellant  and
    Ms Petterson, senior presenting officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.

24. I am grateful for  the  submissions  heard  from  Ms  Cleghorn  and  Ms
    Petterson on the issues that arise in the grounds advanced on behalf of
    the appellant. I confirm that I have considered  those  submissions  in
    accordance with the decision of the FtTJ and the grounds which had been
    filed before the Upper Tribunal.

25. There is no challenge made to the FtTJ's findings of  fact  as  to  the
    events in Iraq  or  her  findings  made  concerning  his  age  and  the
    reliability of the CSID.

The submissions:

26. The first ground asserts that the judge applied an  incorrect  approach
    regarding being able to obtain a CSID card. It is submitted that as the
    judge accepted he cannot return to his home  area  (Tuz  Khurmatu)  his
    return can only be to Baghdad as he is not from the IKR.  At  paragraph
    59 - 61 of the decision the judge noted that it would be  possible  for
    him to obtain documents should it be necessary,  and  that  the  family
    could assist in providing the documents for him. The judge then  stated
    that he had the alternative  relocation  to  the  IKR  yet  noted  that
    Baghdad would be too dangerous for the appellant (at [60]).

27. Ms Cleghorn submitted that there was a general paucity in reasoning and
    application of the case law. It was  not  clear  how  or  where  he  is
    supposed to obtain the documents. As at the date of the hearing  return
    was not possible it was not clear whether he should be returned without
    documents. The alternative is that he  remains  in  the  UK  until  the
    documents arrive and then it should follow that he be granted  a  short
    pit of leave to allow the documents to arrive  in  the  UK  to  prevent
    destitution and to demonstrate feasibility.

28. It was also submitted that the judge erred in law by not following  the
    CG decision in AA and that it was unclear on what  evidence  the  judge
    relied upon to reach the conclusion that he would be admitted entry  to
    Baghdad in the first place thus facilitating onward travel to the  IKR.
    The judge was not able to show how the appellant  would  be  returnable
    (relying on paragraph 170 in AA (Iraq).

29. In conclusion it was submitted that the appellant could not be returned
    to Iraq because there was an article 15 (c) risk in his home  area.  It
    was arguable that the judge erred in her assessment of the  outstanding
    issue of internal relocation and did not distinguish between a CSID,  a
    passport or an INC and assumed the trip across the IKR was made with  a
    CSID. Therefore if his return is feasible and in the light of paragraph
    170 of AA (Iraq) the burden is on the secretary of state to demonstrate
    what documents they rely on to obtain a passport or laissez  pass�r  at
    which point the consideration of whether a person has a CSID comes into
    play.

30. In her oral submissions she summarised her  grounds  that  firstly  the
    FtTJ failed to properly consider internal relocation to the IKR in  the
    light of the country guidance and his personal circumstances.  Secondly
    as set out at paragraph 5 of the grounds it was incumbent on the  judge
    to consider how he would travel to the IKR from Baghdad,  and  thirdly,
    the judge and failed to properly apply country guidance decision of AAH
    in the light of the appellant's circumstances.

31. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent submitted that whilst  it  was
    submitted that the FtTJ misapplied the decision in AAH, as set  out  at
    paragraph 9 of the head note, even if the judge erred in her assessment
    of how the appellant would travel to the IKR and accepted that  he  was
    not able to stay in Baghdad, and the appellant  had  limited  education
    and no employment history at paragraph 9 (iv) whilst  the  options  are
    limited he could apply for a voluntary grant to assist him in providing
    for his needs in the IKR.

32. As to the CSID, she submitted that the FtTJ did not accept his  account
    of the lack of family contact at paragraph 52 and that there were other
    references to his uncle at paragraph 56. Her finding  at  paragraph  59
    was that the appellant had not been straightforward  about  his  family
    members and contact with them and that the appellant was likely  to  be
    aware of his family's whereabouts and  it  would  be  possible  him  to
    obtain copies of his father's documentation to assist with  alternative
    documents  should  it  be  necessary.  In  the  alternative  the  judge
    concluded that it was reasonably likely that the family were  aware  of
    the whereabouts of his CSID.

33. Therefore she submitted even if there was  an  error  relating  to  the
    consideration of internal relocation the light of the findings made  by
    the judge the appellant would be able to obtain some kind of  documents
    and therefore it would not be  unduly  harsh  and  he  could  establish
    himself in the IKR and any error would not therefore be material.

34. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision which I now
    give.

35. When considering the grounds at paragraph 3 and feasibility of  return,
    it is clear from the country guidance decision  in  AA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944, where the amended country guidance set out  in  an
    Annex, that:

"an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by reference  to
any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of  a  current  or  expired
Iraqi passport or a laissez passer, if the Tribunal finds  that  P's  return
is not currently feasible on account of a lack of any of those documents ."



36. The basis for that guidance, amended  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
    consensual basis, is set out at [36]-[41] of the judgment. It is  based
    upon that court's earlier decision in HF (Iraq) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1276 (see [38]-[39] of AA). The  context  means  that  a  claim  cannot
    succeed where an individual assert  that  they  are  at  risk  in  Iraq
    because they lack the very documentation needed to return to Iraq,  the
    absence of which would put them at risk (see [38] of AA).  However,  if
    the absence of a document, once in Iraq, creates a risk in the country,
    then it is a live issue as to whether or not an appellant will be  able
    to obtain such a document. That, of course, is the basis of the country
    guidance in both AA and AAH, that possession of a CSID is an  important
    document when considering an international protection claim based  upon
    an individual's  circumstances  once  in  Iraq.  That  being  the  case
    paragraph 3 does not show any arguable error in the judge's approach.

37. As set out in the decision of the FtTJ, as the  appellant's  home  area
    was in a contested area as at the date of the hearing the judge reached
    the conclusion at [58] he could not return to Tuz Khurmatu.

38. Ms Cleghorn on behalf of the  appellant  submitted  that  as  the  FtTJ
    having accepted that he could not returned his home  area,  his  return
    could only be to Baghdad as he is not from the IKR.  However,  at  [60]
    the FtTJ found that he could not relocate to Baghdad.

39. However, in my judgment the assessment made at paragraph 60 is premised
    on the basis that internal relocation for  the  appellant  to  live  in
    Baghdad in the long term (my emphasis) presented a risk of harm for the
    appellant. In this appellant's case the FtTJ had  found  that  internal
    relocation to the IKR would not be unduly harsh and that  any  stay  in
    Baghdad would be solely for the purposes of travelling on to the IKR. I
    am not  satisfied  that  there  is  any  inconsistency  in  the  FtTJ's
    approach. The decision in AA emphasises that careful consideration must
    be given to the ability of family members to support the  appellant  at
    [197]. It is not disputed that his family do  not  reside  in  Baghdad.
    However the FtTJ did not accept that the appellant was not  in  contact
    with his Uncle or other family members for the reasons that she set out
    at paragraphs 56 and 59.  Therefore it was open to the  FtTJ  to  reach
    the conclusion that the appellant would be able to access support  from
    his Uncle who had been able to assist him in the past by providing  him
    with copies of documents, notably the  CSID. Whilst the  FtTJ  did  not
    accept that this was a reliable document for the reasons that she gave,
    it was open to the judge to find that these documents had been sent  to
    the appellant based on the appellant's own evidence.


40. Ms Cleghorn further submits that the FtTJ erred in  her  assessment  of
    internal relocation to the IKR.


41. The first  issue  relates  to  the  question  of  redocumentation.   As
    explained by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    944 "A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
    financial  assistance  from  the  authorities,  employment,  education,
    housing and medical treatment. If P shows there are no family or  other
    members likely to be able to provide means of support, P is in  general
    likely to fail and face a real risk of destitution amounting to serious
    harm if by the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary  of  State
    or agents to assist P's return have been exhausted,  it  is  reasonably
    likely that P will still have no CSID."






42. In AAH, when considering the issue  of  redocumentation,  the  Tribunal
    found that factors to be considered included:
     "i) Whether he has any other form  of  documentation,  or  information
    about the location  of  his  entry  in  the  civil  register.  An  INC,
    passport, birth/marriage certificates or an expired CSID would  all  be
    of substantial assistance. For someone in possession of one or more  of
    these documents the process should be straightforward. A laissez-passer
    should not be counted for  these  purposes:  39  these  can  be  issued
    without any other form of ID being available, are not of any assistance
    in 'tracing back' to the family record and are confiscated upon arrival
    at Baghdad.
ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If it is in an  area
held, or formerly held, by ISIL, is it operational?
iii) Are there male family members who would be able and willing  to  attend
the civil registry with the returnee? Because  the  registration  system  is
patrilineal it will be relevant to consider whether  the  relative  is  from
the mother or father's side. A maternal uncle  in  possession  of  his  CSID
would be able to assist in locating the original place  of  registration  of
the individual's mother, and from there the trail would need to be  followed
to the place that her records were transferred upon marriage. It  must  also
be borne in mind that a significant number of IDPs in  Iraq  are  themselves
undocumented; if that is the case it is  unlikely  that  they  could  be  of
assistance. A woman without a male relative to assist with  the  process  of
redocumentation would face very significant obstacles in that officials  may
refuse to deal with  her  case  at  all"  (at  106  and  headnote).  It  was
considered that "these questions are significant not just to the  assessment
of whether the returnee might be able to live  a  'relatively  normal  life'
once he or she gets to the IKR; they are also relevant  to  whether  he  can
get there at all" (at 107).

43. The FtTJ applied those factors at paragraph 59 and noted that obtaining
    his CSID would be dependent on contact with family members in Iraq. The
    judge set out why she did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
    straightforward about his family members and his contact with them. The
    FtTJ referred to Facebook being the initial contact but that there were
    other methods of contact including mobile telephones.  The  judge  also
    stated that even if his  uncle  had  left  Kirkuk  it  would  not  have
    prevented him from maintaining a Facebook account. The judge  therefore
    concluded that the appellant was likely to be  aware  of  his  family's
    whereabouts and that it would be possible for the appellant  to  obtain
    copies of his father's documentation to assist in the provision of  the
    CSID.


44. In the alternative at [59) the judge concluded that it  was  reasonably
    likely that the family were aware of the  whereabouts  of  his  genuine
    CSID and that they would be able to assist by providing this to him. On
    the FtTJ's findings of fact which are not challenged  in  the  grounds,
    the appellant would therefore be able to obtain a CSID and in turn  any
    other relevant documentation.


45. Ms Cleghorn submits that at paragraph  59  and  60  the  FtTJ  did  not
    properly consider whether internal  relocation  to  the  IKR  would  be
    unduly harsh by reference to the decision in AAH.


46. The availability of an internal  flight  alternative  to  the  IKR  was
    considered in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 212 (IAC). The guidance given was as follows:


    1.       Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national  returnee (P)
    to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so,  or  do  so  within  a
    reasonable time frame, will depend  on  the  individual  circumstances.
    Factors to be considered include:


    (i)                  Whether P has any other form of  documentation, or
    information about the location of his entry in the civil  register.  An
    INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or an expired CSID would all
    be of substantial assistance. For someone in possession of one or  more
    of these documents the process should be  straightforward.  A  laissez-
    passer should not be counted for these purposes: these  can  be  issued
    without any other form of ID being available, are not of any assistance
    in 'tracing back' to the family record and are confiscated upon arrival
    at Baghdad.


    (ii)              The location of the relevant civil  registry  office.
    If it is in an area held, or formerly held, by ISIL, is it operational?


    (iii)              Are there male family members who would be  able and
    willing to attend the civil registry with P? Because  the  registration
    system is patrilineal it will  be  relevant  to  consider  whether  the
    relative is from the mother or  father's  side.  A  maternal  uncle  in
    possession of his CSID would be able to assist in locating the original
    place of registration of the individual's mother, and  from  there  the
    trail would need to be followed to the  place  that  her  records  were
    transferred upon marriage. It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  a
    significant number of IDPs in Iraq are themselves undocumented; if that
    is the case it is unlikely that they could be of  assistance.  A  woman
    without a male relative to assist with the process  of  redocumentation
    would face very significant obstacles in that officials may  refuse  to
    deal with her case at all.


47.  Section E of Country Guidance annexed to the Court of Appeal's
    decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is replaced with the following
    guidance:


    2.       There are currently  no  international  flights  to  the Iraqi
    Kurdish Region (IKR). All  returns  from  the  United  Kingdom  are  to
    Baghdad.


    3.       For an  Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin in
    possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from  Baghdad
    to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable and practical and can
    be made without a real risk of P suffering persecution,  serious  harm,
    Article 3 ill treatment nor would any difficulties on the journey  make
    relocation unduly harsh.


    4.       P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
    IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


    5.       P will face  considerable  difficulty  in  making  the journey
    between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or  valid  passport.
    There are numerous checkpoints en route, including two  checkpoints  in
    the immediate vicinity of the airport. If P has neither a  CSID  nor  a
    valid passport there is a real risk of P being detained at a checkpoint
    until such time as the  security  personnel  are  able  to  verify  P's
    identity. It is not reasonable to require P to travel  between  Baghdad
    and IKR by land absent the ability of P to verify  his  identity  at  a
    checkpoint. This normally requires the  attendance  of  a  male  family
    member and production  of  P's  identity  documents  but  may  also  be
    achieved by calling upon  "connections"  higher  up  in  the  chain  of
    command.


    6.       Once at the IKR border  (land  or  air)  P  would  normally be
    granted entry to the territory.  Subject  to  security  screening,  and
    registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would  be  permitted  to
    enter and reside in the  IKR  with  no  further  legal  impediments  or
    requirements. There is no sponsorship requirement for Kurds.


    7.       Whether P would be at particular risk of  ill-treatment during
    the security screening process  must  be  assessed  on  a  case-by-case
    basis. Additional factors that may increase risk  include:  (i)  coming
    from a family with a known association with ISIL, (ii) coming  from  an
    area associated with ISIL and (iii) being a  single  male  of  fighting
    age. P is likely to be able to evidence the fact of recent arrival from
    the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of  having  arrived  directly
    from ISIL territory.


    8.       If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
    require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances P would, in
    general, have sufficient assistance from the family so  as  to  lead  a
    'relatively normal life', which  would  not  be  unduly  harsh.  It  is
    nevertheless important for decision-makers to determine the  extent  of
    any assistance likely to be provided by P's family on a  case  by  case
    basis.


    9.       For those without the assistance  of  family  in  the  IKR the
    accommodation options are limited:


    (i)              Absent  special  circumstances  it  is  not reasonably
    likely that P will be able to gain access to one of the  refugee  camps
    in the IKR; these camps  are  already  extremely  overcrowded  and  are
    closed to newcomers. 64% of IDPs are accommodated in  private  settings
    with the vast majority living with family members.


    (ii)           If P cannot live with a family member,  apartments  in a
    modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent at a cost of
    between $300 and $400 per month.


    (iii)         P  could  resort  to  a  'critical  shelter arrangement',
    living in an unfinished  or  abandoned  structure,  makeshift  shelter,
    tent, mosque, church or squatting in a government building. It would be
    unduly harsh to require P to relocate to the IKR if P will  live  in  a
    critical housing shelter without access to basic  necessities  such  as
    food, clean water and clothing.


    (iv)         In considering whether P would  be  able  to  access basic
    necessities, account must be taken  of  the  fact  that  failed  asylum
    seekers are entitled to apply for a grant under the  Voluntary  Returns
    Scheme, which could give P access to �1500. Consideration  should  also
    be given to whether P can obtain financial support from  other  sources
    such as (a) employment, (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c)  the
    availability of ad hoc charity or by being able to access PDS rations.


    10.   Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed on a case-
    by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


    (i)                  Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to
    secure legitimate employment.


    (ii)                The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living  in the
    IKR is 70%.


    (iii)              P cannot work without a CSID.


    (iv)               Patronage  and  nepotism  continue  to  be important
    factors in securing employment. A returnee with family  connections  to
    the  region  will  have  a  significant  advantage  in  that  he  would
    ordinarily be able to call upon those contacts to make introductions to
    prospective employers and to vouch for him.


    (v)                Skills, education and experience.  Unskilled workers
    are at the greatest disadvantage, with the decline in the  construction
    industry reducing the number of labouring jobs available.


    (vi)              If P is from an area with a  marked  association with
    ISIL, that may deter prospective employers.


48. As Ms Petterson submitted it would have been preferable for the FtTJ to
    set out the factors referred to in AAH. However, in the  light  of  her
    findings of  fact,  the  assessment  that  was  undertaken  by  her  at
    paragraphs 57 - 60 demonstrate  that  the  FtTJ  properly  applied  the
    guidance  to  the  appellant's  circumstances.  The  principal  finding
    related to the appellant's remaining family in Iraq and  that  contrary
    to his account, the judge found that he was reasonably likely to be  in
    contact with them and knew their whereabouts  and  also  those  of  his
    uncle. As a result of that, the FtTJ was entitled to find that he would
    be able to access the appropriate documentation to ensure that  he  was
    provided with a CSID. The judge recorded  at  [59]  that  she  was  not
    provided with information about where the  appellant's  relevant  civil
    registry office will be located. The burden was  on  the  appellant  to
    satisfy the factual assessment. However, the judge did go  on  to  find
    that obtaining the CSID would depend upon his contact with  the  family
    members in Iraq which the judge went on to find had been established in
    his case.


49. In reaching the conclusion that he could internally relocate to the IKR
    and that it would not be unduly harsh, the FtTJ to a took into  account
    that he could speak Kurdish Sorani and that he was of Kurdish ethnicity
    and of the Sunni religion. He had no health problems that the FtTJ  had
    been aware of. Whilst the judge found that his  education  was  limited
    and that he had no employment history,  as  Ms  Petterson  submits  the
    appellant would have the availability of applying for a  grant  as  set
    out in subsection (iv) and also in the light of the  findings  of  fact
    made that he would be able to obtain income from  other  sources  which
    include his family members in Iraq and notably his uncle. As  he  would
    have the advantage of a CSID, he would be able to obtain employment and
    whilst there were problems in the number of IDP's in the  IKR,  it  was
    open to the judge to find that as a young man with no  health  problems
    he would be able to obtain employment alongside any assistance provided
    from his family members.

50. In summary, the assessment made was one reasonably open to the FtTJ  on
    the evidence, both oral and documentary, and I am  not  satisfied  that
    the decision of the FtTJ demonstrates the making of an error on a point
    of law. The decision to dismiss the appeal shall  stand.  It  is  known
    that there is now a more recent CG decision. It would be  open  to  the
    appellant, in the light of that decision to make a fresh  claim  should
    there be grounds to do so.



Notice of Decision

51. The decision of the FtTJ did not involve the making of an  error  on  a
    point of law; the appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 3/3/2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
