
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07053/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2021                           |On 19 March 2021              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     ZS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel, direct access
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  His date of birth is 20 February
1988.

The Appellant came to the UK as a student on 10 April 2011.  He was
subsequently granted periods of leave as a student.  He was granted leave
to remain as the spouse of a British citizen which expired on 29 May 2016.

On 22 October 2014 the Appellant was convicted of conspiracy to import
class A drugs.  He was sentenced to five years' imprisonment.  The
Secretary of State made a deportation order against him.  The decision to
deport the Appellant was served on him on 5 December 2014.  The Appellant
signed a disclaimer waiving his right to oppose deportation.  On 31 March
2015 he was served with a deportation order.  Removal directions were set
for 9 February 2016.  On 5 February 2016 the Appellant lodged
representations.  Following this, removal directions were cancelled.  On 16
February 2016 he was served with a decision to refuse a human rights claim.
 On 19 February 2016 the Appellant notified the Secretary of State that he
wished to make an asylum claim.  This was refused by the Secretary of State
in a decision of 28 June 2016.The Appellant appealed against the decision
on human rights grounds.  His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Sweet.  This decision was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Craig in
a decision dated 29 September 2017 ("the error of law decision").

The error of law decision

The salient parts of Judge Craig's decision are as follows:

"8.  There are a number of grounds raised on behalf of the appellant
although only one has been pursued with any vigour before this Tribunal.  I
can deal very briefly with the grounds raised which were not seriously
pursued today.  The first is that he would be at risk from non-state
agents.  In my judgment, on the basis of the evidence which had been before
the First-tier Tribunal and the submissions which had been made this ground
could not succeed.

9.   I deal also with the Article 8 claim which was made within the
grounds.  I note that when giving permission to appeal Judge Kelly stated
that while it was arguable that 'the effect of the appellant's deportation
upon his spouse is also inadequately reasoned', he added that

'it is doubtful that it is material to the outcome of the appeal given the
length of the appellant's sentence of imprisonment (five years) and the
consequent requirement under Section 117C of the 2002 Act for there to be
compelling circumstances that are 'over and above' the consequences for his
spouse'.

In my judgment, Judge Kelly was right to express his doubt as to the
materiality of any breach there might have been in this regard.  This
appellant was sentenced to more than four years' imprisonment for an
extremely serious drugs offence and having considered all the facts set out
within the file, although the consequences for his spouse will undoubtedly
be unpleasant, there is no factor at present that is sufficiently
compelling as could possibly warrant the granting of further leave to
remain to this appellant (and the cancelling of the deportation order) on
the grounds of his family life.

10.  The ground that Judge Kelly considered was properly arguable and
material was that the judge failed to give adequate consideration to
whether or not on return the appellant would be at risk of being tried
again for (or for offences akin to) the offence of which he had been
convicted and that he would be at risk if convicted of receiving the death
penalty.  This argument had been advanced certainly to some extent before
Judge Sweet but his consideration of it was, to say the least, brief.  He
dealt with this argument in one paragraph, paragraph 63, as follows:

'63. Counsel for the appellant has provided some evidence of the double
jeopardy provisions within Pakistan and confirmation that the offence for
which the appellant has been convicted and sentenced in the UK carries the
death penalty there.  I am not persuaded that the appellant is of any
interest to the authorities or to the alleged mafia in Pakistan, because of
my views of his overall credibility and my concerns about the strength of
the evidence that the authorities are interested in him.  Furthermore, the
respondent has provided legal advice in the refusal letter that the
appellant will not be subject to double jeopardy on return.  He has been
away from Pakistan since April 2011.  It is unlikely that the authorities
will be interested in him on his return'.

11.  The basis upon which the appellant's claim is advanced certainly
before this Tribunal is as follows.  Although Pakistan has double jeopardy
provisions whereby in some cases there is a prohibition against retrying
somebody for the same offence of which he or she has been convicted
previously by a 'court of competent jurisdiction', it is by no means
certain that these provisions would provide protection to this appellant.
In the absence of such protection, the appellant would be at risk of being
tried for what is a capital offence in Pakistan and there is a real risk
that if convicted he would thereafter be sentenced to death.  There was
evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, which has been referred to before
me, that although there had been a moratorium on imposing the death penalty
in Pakistan for about six years this moratorium ended in December 2014 and
in the following year some 320 people were executed.  Amongst the offences
which carry the death penalty (as appears from the respondent's own country
information updated on 11 May 2016 (at 6.1.1) are the following:

'Importing, exporting into and from Pakistan dangerous drugs - Section 13
of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930.

Importing, exporting inter-provincially or manufacturing drugs - Section 14
of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 [and]

Drug smuggling - Section 9 of the Control of Narcotics Substances Act,
1997'.

12.  In this particular case, as is apparent from the sentencing remarks of
the judge, which are contained within the file, the UK authorities were
alerted to the conspiracy to import drugs from Pakistan by the Pakistan
authorities.  I set out the relevant passages from the sentencing remarks
as follows:

'In 2013, the Pakistani authorities intercepted a package which they found
contained heroin.  With commendable forethought and cooperation, they
contacted the United Kingdom customs and police.  There then followed a
very thorough investigation into packages that were being sent from
Pakistan to various addresses in the United Kingdom.  Those packages
contained perfectly innocent ...

[re various defendants, including this appellant], the roles of those four
defendants played were as recipients of packages.  They may not have been
aware of the full extent of the conspiracy; they may not have been aware of
the quantity of drugs that were coming in...  There is evidence that some
of them may have had more telephone contact or perhaps been involved in
more packages but it is very difficult to be precise...'

13.  It is clear from elsewhere within the sentencing remarks that the role
which the appellant and others played was as the recipients of packages
which were sent from Pakistan and therefore, at least arguably, could be
said to have been involved in the export of drugs from Pakistan which
according to the country information on Pakistan pursuant to Section 13 of
that country's Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 potentially carries with it the
death penalty.

14.  This Tribunal was also shown material which was before Judge Sweet
concerning publicity which had been given to the arrest and conviction of
the various defendants in this case, including the appellant, which
included publicity given on the Metropolitan Police's own website regarding
these convictions.  The defendants including this appellant are described
by name and his address is given as well as his date of birth.  His
photograph is also shown.  Curiously (although this is not material to the
issue I have to consider) it seems that the sentence which he received is
set out incorrectly because he is said to have been sentenced to eight
years' imprisonment whereas in fact he was only sentenced to five years'
imprisonment.  This is not material because the relevance of this publicity
is not as to its precise accuracy (which if there was to be a trial would
be determined at a trial in Pakistan) but that (it is claimed) it supports
the appellant's case that there would be a real risk that the Pakistani
authorities know about the activities of which he has been convicted and
might very well decide to prosecute him further in Pakistan.

15.  As already noted, the judge dismissed this argument at paragraph 63
and essentially gave two reasons, being first that the respondent 'has
provided legal advice in the refusal letter that the appellant will not be
subject to double jeopardy on return'; and secondly that he had been away
from Pakistan since April 2011 and that it was 'unlikely that the
authorities will be interested in him on his return'.

16.  As a matter of fact that statement is wrong because the appellant had
in fact returned to Pakistan briefly in 2014 before he was arrested but
further the fact that the respondent had 'provided legal advice' (although
that is probably not the most accurate way in which what is said in the
refusal letter should be described) does not absolve the judge from making
his own findings as to this matter.  The appeal after all was an appeal
against the decision contained within the refusal letter and it is not an
adequate answer to note that the respondent does not agree with the
argument.

17.  The appellant's claim before this Tribunal is that the 'advice'
contained within the refusal letter (which is at page 192 of the
appellant's bundle) that the claim that he would be at risk of being tried
for a drugs offence 'is inconsistent with the country information above
because in Pakistan there is no double jeopardy' is wrong.  The relevant
parts of this advice received from the Foreign & Commonwealth Office (FCO)
are as follows:

'Following consultation with a law firm in Pakistan, a letter dated 12
February 2008 from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) stated that:

'We [the Pakistan law firm] have reviewed the provisions of law relating to
double jeopardy to ascertain whether any individual who has been convicted
in the UK and has served time can be tried and sentenced for the same crime
on his return to Pakistan and would advise as:

Under Section 403 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 (the 'Code') no
person who has once been tried by a court of competent jurisdiction for an
offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence shall during the
pendancy [sic] of the acquittal or conviction be liable to be tried again
for the same offence.  However, a person so acquitted or convicted may be
tried for (a) any distinct offence for which a separate charge might have
been made i.e. where more than one offence are committed by the same
person; (b) a different offence arising out of the consequences of the act
which constituted the first offence but which consequences together with
the act constitute a different offence and (c) any other offence
constituted by the same acts which constituted the first offence but which
the court which first tried him was not competent to try.  ...'

[Various other points are then made before the advice continued as
follows]:

'To ascertain whether... [a] person convicted by a court in UK is covered
by Section 403 of the Code it needs to be determined whether the conditions
set out for invoking Section 403 of the Code are met...  The Code is silent
on the issue of whether the term 'court of competent jurisdiction' as used
therein extends to cover a foreign court of competent jurisdiction.
However, where the legislature has intended to extend cover of any statute
to foreign courts it has done so by specific reference i.e. in the Control
of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 specific reference is made to a 'foreign
court of competent jurisdiction' and it is therefore safe to conclude that
a 'court of competent jurisdiction' for purposes of Section 403 of the Code
has to be a court within the territorial jurisdiction of Pakistan...

Likewise, the constitutional guarantee provided by Article 13(A) of the
Constitution will, in our opinion, not extend to an offence which has been
tried and convicted outside Pakistan as the doctrine of dual sovereignty
permits successive prosecutions by two states for the same conduct.'
(Country of Origin Information Report, Pakistan, August 2013, Para 11.66 -
11.67).''

18.  In my judgment, it is certainly at least arguable from a consideration
of the FCO advice that the respondent's conclusion that the appellant's
fear that he might be subject to the death penalty if he was returned to
Pakistan is 'inconsistent with the country information above because in
Pakistan there is no double jeopardy' misunderstands that advice.  It is
arguable that while there is a general prohibition on double jeopardy, this
prohibition would not apply in this case, not just because the conviction
by a court in the UK would not be covered but also because what he could be
charged with within Pakistan might be considered as coming within the
category where 'more than one offence' had been committed by the same
person, being importing drugs into the UK (for which he was convicted in
the UK) and exporting those (and possibly other) drugs from Pakistan.  I
note that it was clear from the sentencing remarks that the judge did not
rule out there having been more occasions on which the defendants had been
involved in the various drugs offences.

19.  In my judgment, at the very least, the judge ought to have considered
very carefully the evidence provided and his conclusion, contained in just
the one paragraph, that it was 'unlikely' that the authorities would be
interested in his return and that he would not be subject to double
jeopardy because that was the advice of the respondent, is inadequately
reasoned.

20.  On behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke did point out that certainly in
the skeleton argument that had been before the First-tier Tribunal the
specific point was not taken with regard to the FCO advice, but Mr
Butterworth confirmed that (as he would have been expected to do) he had
expanded on the skeleton argument before Judge Sweet, and that while he did
not specifically refer to the FCO advice as set out within the refusal
letter, nonetheless he did refer the judge to the evidence regarding the
prevalence of the death penalty in Pakistan and did not accept that the
appellant would be able to claim the protection of any prohibition against
double jeopardy.

21.  Furthermore, this is a case where if the appellant's fears are well-
founded, he would or might be subject to execution upon return, and in
those circumstances any judge dealing with his case has to apply anxious
scrutiny.  The judge stated in terms within his decision (at paragraph 15)
that the respondent's bundle had contained the refusal letter (of which he
relied upon the conclusion of the respondent but seemingly without giving
separate consideration to the FCO advice on which it was based) and he was
under an obligation to consider the conclusion carefully in light of the
advice, which he does not appear to have done.  At the very least the
decision that the appellant would not be at risk on return for the reasons
he gave is inadequately reasoned.

22.  As I made clear during the course of the hearing, this Tribunal takes
very seriously indeed the prevalence of offences involving the importation
or distribution of class A drugs and it would only be in exceptional
circumstances that an Article 8 claim could succeed preventing deportation,
which does not apply in this case.  However, it is also the case that Judge
Sweet's finding that Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002 applies because the event of which the appellant has been
convicted is sufficiently serious that he should not be entitled to asylum,
is sustainable.  Nonetheless he is entitled to protection under Article 3
of the ECHR in circumstances where there is a real risk that he would
suffer serious harm on return.  His claim is that he would be at real risk
of serious harm in that he could be executed on return.  He would also
arguably be entitled in these circumstances (if this is a real risk) to
protection under Article 2.  However much revulsion is felt towards foreign
criminals who commit offences of this type and however strong the need to
deter others who might otherwise be tempted to commit such offences, he is
still entitled to the protection afforded by Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.
In my judgment that argument needed to be considered adequately by the
Tribunal and regrettably it was not.

23.  Accordingly, it follows that the decision of Judge Sweet must be set
aside as containing a material error of law and the decision must be
remade.

24.  Having canvassed with both parties the course that should now be
followed it was accepted by both parties that as the facts in this case did
not have to be reconsidered and the Tribunal was only concerned with
whether or not the appellant would be at risk on return of facing
execution, it would be appropriate to retain the appeal in this Tribunal
and accordingly I will make appropriate directions."

Judge Craig made directions in relation to the service of further evidence
relating to the issue of double jeopardy.From what I can see there have
been a number ofhearings and directions issued relating to this case.

The matter again came before Judge Craig on 15 December 2017.  There is a
Note of Hearing and Further Directions prepared by Upper Tribunal Judge
Craig.  At paragraph 2 he recorded that the

".....sole issue before the Tribunal is as to whether or not the appellant,
who was sentenced to five years' imprisonment for his involvement in
conspiracy to import class A drugs might be at risk of being prosecuted
again in Pakistan and sentenced to death.  ...  These are the issues which
will have to be canvassed in due course and among the directions I made was
that it was not intended at the resumed hearing to hear any further
evidence from the appellant or members of his family.  I decided and remain
of the opinion that the only possible reason why it might be unlawful to
return this appellant to Pakistan is if he is at real risk of being
executed on return.  There are no other reasons arguably so compelling that
he should not be deported".

An extension of time was given for the Appellant to serve the evidence of a
country expert, Dr Livia Holden.  The matter was listed for a further case
management hearing.

The matter again came before Judge Craig on 17 April 2018.  On that
occasion it was not possible for the Appellant to provide expert evidence
within the time frame originally envisaged and that the Respondent had not
been able to make submissions relating to it.  Judge Craig made further
directions giving the Respondent permission to adduce further evidence and
to make further submissions but stating that this must be lodged with the
Tribunal and served on the Appellant by no later than Friday, 15 June 2018.

The matter again came before Judge Craig on 27 July 2018.  On this occasion
the Secretary of State's representative informed Judge Craig that the
Respondent's intention was to adduce further evidence relating to the
Appellant's co-defendants in the criminal trial who have been deported to
Pakistan because it is the Respondent's case that in the absence of any
evidence that anything untoward has happened to them as a result of their
activities it was extremely unlikely that the Appellant would be treated
differently.

Judge Craig made a number of further directions which are as follows:

"1)  The respondent is given permission to adduce evidence as to the dates
on which the appellant's co-defendants were deported to Pakistan, so long
as this evidence is filed with the Tribunal and served on the appellant by
no later than Friday 10 August 2018 (it is recorded that on behalf of the
respondent Mr Melvin indicated that he would be in a position to supply
this evidence within seven days).  [I record that this evidence has been
filed in accordance with this Direction]

2)   Both parties are given permission to adduce evidence if available, as
to what, if any, actions have been taken by the Pakistan authorities in
respect of the appellant's co-defendants, and in particular whether any of
them have subsequently faced prosecution in respect of drugs offences said
to be have been committed by them before their return, so long as such
evidence is lodged with the Tribunal and served on the other party by no
later than Friday 7 September 2018.

3)   The appellant is given permission to adduce evidence, if available,
with regard to any person deported to Pakistan who is said subsequently to
have been charged with drugs offences alleged to have been committed before
their return, again so long as this evidence is lodged with the Tribunal
and filed with the respondent by no later than Friday 7 September 2018.

4)   The appellant may also produce a supplementary report from Dr Holden,
if so advised, again so long as this report is lodged with the Tribunal and
served on the respondent by no later than Friday 7 September 2018.

5)   This appeal will be listed for hearing on the first available date, to
be notified to the parties, on or after Monday 24 September 2018.

6)   If and to the extent that the appellant wishes to rely upon the
evidence of Dr Holden, she must be available at the hearing for cross-
examination.  [I record that on 9 August 2018 the appellant wrote to the
Tribunal that Dr Holden had advised that she does not attend Court Hearings
and requesting a further 6 weeks in order to instruct an alternative expert
who does.  I accordingly amend the direction I made at 4) above and extend
the time by which the appellant may lodge and serve a supplementary report
(which may be by an alternative expert) to Friday 22 September 2018, as the
appellant has requested.  The Hearing will not now be listed before Monday
15 October 2015]."

On 1 October 2020 the matter came before me.  It was listed for a CMR. The
Appellant intended to rely on Article 8 ECHR in relation to his family life
with his daughter who was born on 15 August 2020.  His evidence is that he
is the child's full-time carer.  His wife is in full-time employment.  The
Secretary of State's case as set out in Mr Jarvis's written submissions is
that this is a new matter (Section 85(4) - (6) of the 2002 Act) and
accordingly the Appellant needs the Secretary of State's consent in order
to enable the Upper Tribunal to determine the matter.  There is
considerable written argument asking the Upper Tribunal to depart from its
decision in Birch (Precariousness and mistake; new matters) [2020] UKUT 86,
in which the Upper Tribunal concluded that the prohibition on considering
new matters in Section 85 of the 2002 Act does not apply to proceedings in
the Upper Tribunal.

The Appellant was not successful in his attempt to challenge the decision
of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to Article 8 of ECHR or Section 72
of the 2002 Act.  As properly identified by Judge Craig, the only issue for
the Upper Tribunal to determine is that relating to double jeopardy and the
death penalty.  Should the Appellant now wish to raise a claim under
Article 8, it is necessary for him to make an application to the Secretary
of State, who will consider it within the framework of paragraph 353 of the
Immigration Rules. In any event, Ms Reid conceded that in respect of
raising a new matter in the light of Mr Jarvis's written submissions in
respect of Birch, the Appellant has an uphill struggle.

 Ms Reid relied on a skeleton argument of 11 February 2021. There was
Respondent's preliminary "new" matter submissions of 20 May 2020 drafted by
Mr I Jarvis, the Respondent's written submissions of 14 June 2018 prepared
by Mr T Melvin and the Respondent's preliminary submissions also prepared
by Mr T Melvin of 30 September 2020.

At the hearing before me Ms Reid confirmed that the expert was not willing
to attend the hearing to give evidence.  The Appellant has not been able to
instruct another expert because of financial constraints.  He does not have
the benefit of legal aid.

The Appellant's evidence

Ms Reid indicated that the Appellant intended to give evidence.  I queried
this in the light of the Appellant not being an expert in Pakistani law.
Ms Reid drew my attention to paragraph 22 of the Appellant's witness
statement.  This reads as follows:-

"I have clearly demonstrated that on the basis of the evidence available I
face a real risk of suffering serious harm on return to Pakistan from the
United Kingdom and on that basis I believe that I in fact qualify for
humanitarian protection.  My case was well-reported and documented in the
national press and associated media and my family will face serious and
dangerous repercussions if I was returned there.  Indeed, the police have
visited my family on numerous occasions in Pakistan and numerous threats
have been made against my family as witnessed by my father [AS] and people
in the surrounding area to where my family resides."

The Appellant gave evidence adopting his witness statement as his evidence-
in-chief.  The Appellant clarified in examination-in-chief that he received
a call from his father whilst he (the Appellant) was in prison, stating
that the police had visited the family home.  The police believed that the
Appellant had already returned to Pakistan.  They had visited the family
home twice since, in 2015 and 2016.  There have been no visits since
2016.Mrs Aboni indicated that the Secretary of State did not accept the
Appellant's evidence.  She did not ask him any questions in cross-
examination.

The Appellant relied on a certificate prepared by an advocate in Pakistan,
Muhammad Sharif Arian. The date on the document is illegible. It reads as
follows:

"This is to certify that I am the council of Mr Zahid Shah S/O Syed Amin
Shah, whose date of birth 09-01-1987, holding Pakistani passport No.
CU5149993, who return from United Kingdom to Pakistan on 01-03-2017 and
arrested on 03-03-2017, the charge is importing & exporting heroin from
Karachi-Pakistan to United Kingdom, who is currently under trail in Karachi
Jail."

Dr Holden's evidence

Dr Holden states that the law in Pakistan provides constitutional
guarantees against repeated prosecution or punishment for the same offence
(Article 13(a) of the Constitution and Section 403 of the Criminal
Procedure Code). In principle, it is required that the accused was tried
and that the trial was held by a "competent jurisdiction".

According to "Country of Origin Information 2008 the term 'court of
competent jurisdiction' does not include a court located outside Pakistan
because 'where the legislature has intended to extend cover of any statute
to foreign courts if (sic) has done so by specific reference'.

In accordance with  Article 3 Pakistan Penal Code 'any person liable, by
any Pakistan Law, to be tried for an offence committed beyond Pakistan
shall be dealt with according to the provision of this Code for any act
committed beyond Pakistan in the same manner as if such act had been
committed within Pakistan'. She states as follows:-

"14. Further it must be signalled that the extent of the double jeopardy
principle is questioned within Pakistani legislation, specifically
concerning drugs-related offences.  In 1998, the Secretary of the Law and
Justice Commission was requested to examine whether trial in drug-related
offences under the Customs Act 1969 and subsequently under the Control of
Narcotic Substances Act 1997, tantamount to double jeopardy, prohibited
under Article 13 of the Constitution?  The Law and Justice Commission noted
the ambiguity of the law since prosecution for the same offence is possible
both by ordinary courts and special courts created under the newly enacted
Control of Narcotic Substances Act 1997.

15.  On the basis of the above-mentioned information I am of the opinion
that to date the protection against double jeopardy in Pakistan, although
adequately mentioned by the Constitution and the Criminal Procedure Code,
remains uncertain for what concerns specific aspect of drug-related
offences for which special courts have been created.  Additionally, the
prevalent interpretation regarding the meaning of the term 'competent
court' is that this does not cover 'foreign country jurisdiction', unless
specified."

At paragraphs 16 to 18 Dr Holden considers how plausible or likely it is
that the Pakistani authorities would try the Appellant for the earlier drug
offences despite him having already been sentenced in the United Kingdom.
She states:-

"16. According to the above-mentioned information the law does not prevent
Pakistani authorities to try the Appellant in Pakistan for earlier drugs
offences for at least two reasons:- 1) the double jeopardy does not extent
(sic) to foreign country jurisdiction unless clearly specified by the
legislature, 2) the present legislation in Pakistan contains certain
ambiguities specifically regarding the prosecution of drug-related offences
in connection with the creation of special courts under the Control of
Narcotic Substances Act 1997.

17.  Available information from a 2015 report by Maybritt Jill Alpes of the
University of Amsterdam indicates that returnees to Pakistan are likely to
be the victim of money extortion, detention and imprisonment or threats of
detention and imprisonment.4According to the United States Department of
State (2012): Country Report on Human Rights Practices for 2012 Pakistani
police and prison officials frequently extort money from prisoners and
their families.  Irrespectively from whether or not the Appellant is a
convicted criminal in the eyes of Pakistani law enforcement authorities, in
my opinion, he would be in a vulnerable situation and likely danger of
being the victim of undue pressure by state and non-state actors.  To the
best of my knowledge as a failed asylum seeker returning to Pakistan the
Appellant and his family will be the victim of extortion, physical violence
and threat of detention and imprisonment.  In my opinion the level of these
risks ranges from high probability to very high probability.

18.  Although, I am not in the position to say whether or not the Appellant
will be tried if removed to Pakistan, in my opinion there is an almost
certain probability that the Appellant will be detained or threatened to be
detained and submitted to physical violence.  Hence, the deplorable
conditions of prisons and the occurrence of torture during detention should
be taken into account when deciding on the deportation of the Appellant to
Pakistan.  Additionally, since the legislation does not extend the double
jeopardy principle to jurisdiction outside Pakistan and since there is a
significant ambiguity within the present legislation regarding drug
smuggling in Pakistan (see also next paragraph), I am of the opinion that
the fear of the Appellant to be tried in Pakistan is highly plausible."

Dr Holden goes on to consider the offence for which the Appellant would
likely be tried and Pakistan's commitment to eradicate drug smuggling which
has strengthened since it has been identified as one of the main income
sources of terrorism.

Dr Holden was specifically asked to what extent the Appellant was likely to
be of adverse interest to the authorities and she stated:

"21. I am not in the position to say whether or not Pakistani judiciary
will be influenced by the conviction of the Appellant by the British court.
 However, Pakistan's commitment to fight against drug trafficking has been
reiterated constantly by political leaders in the past twenty years by
enacting special legislation and by establishing new law enforcement
authorities dedicated to the control of narcotics."

In the same paragraph she states that:

"Given the Pakistani authorities have already collaborated with British
authorities to apprehend the Appellant and since Pakistani law does not
prevent the prosecution of the Appellant, I am of the opinion, that certain
passages of the sentencing remarks may also be of adverse interest to the
Appellant in Pakistan."

De Holden concludes that the decision of the Respondent disregards "the
information regarding the extent of protection afforded by the double
jeopardy principle in Pakistan as well as the inherent ambiguity of
Pakistan law allowing for double jeopardy in particular for drug-related
offences".

In the expert's opinion the Secretary of State has not taken into
consideration that the Pakistani authorities collaborated with the British
authorities in prosecuting the Appellant, which is consistent with
Pakistan's aggressive policy for the control of narcotics.

The Secretary of State's evidence

The Secretary of State relied on a letter to the Tribunal marked for the
attention of Upper Tribunal Judge Craig from Mr T Melvin of 1 August 2018.
It records that the Appellant and his co-defendants in the criminal trial
were deported between September 2015 and February 2017. Mr Melvin stated
that as far as he is aware, the Home Office has not been provided with any
credible evidence that any of the co-defendant's have been detained or face
prosecution again for the crimes that they have been convicted of and
sentenced for in the UK.

The background evidence

The Secretary of State relies on background evidence as set out in the
Reasons for Refusal Letter and in Judge Craig's error of law decision.
However, the Respondent relies primarily on the Country Policy and
Information Note Pakistan: Prison conditions Version 3.0 November 2019("the
2019 CPIN"). The salient parts read as follows:

    4.2  Double jeopardy

4.2.1    Section 403 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code, 1898,
prescribes that no person, who has once been tried by a Court of competent
jurisdiction for an offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence
shall or awaiting the outcome of the acquittal or conviction, be liable to
be tried again for the same offence.  However, a person so acquitted or
convicted may be tried for (a) any distinct offence for which a separate
charge might have been made, i.e. where more than one offence was committed
by the same person; (b) a different offence that occurred as a consequence
of the first offence; (c) any other offence constituted by the same acts
which constituted the first offence but which the court which first tried
him was not competent to try2.

4.2.2    Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) officials at the British
High Commission in Islamabad, in correspondence dated April 2019 with the
Country Policy and Information Team (CPIT), indicated that the double
jeopardy principles were upheld in Pakistan's courts where a decision was
reached in a foreign jurisdiction, providing the court reaching the
decision was considered to be one of competent jurisdiction.  The FCO could
not find an example of a court in Pakistan concluding that a foreign court
was not of competent jurisdiction.  As examples, the FCO cited 2 cases in
which Pakistan courts had upheld the decisions of cases heard in the Royal
Court of Jersey and the UK Crown Court3.

4.2.3    Regarding offences committed by outside of Pakistan, the FCO
letter noted:

's.188 Criminal Procedure Code provides for the jurisdiction of criminal
courts and tribunals to extend to offences committed by a citizen of
Pakistan abroad.  Most of the case-law concerning this provision deals with
offences committed in the tribal and administered territories which do not
otherwise fall within the jurisdiction of the Pakistani courts.  In Abdul
Qadir Shah v Muhammad Qasim PLD 2014 Balochistan 28, the High Court held
that in an instance where an offence of murder was committed outside of the
territorial restrictions of Pakistan (in a border town in Afghanistan) by
Pakistani citizens, the court did have the jurisdiction to proceed in
trying the case so long as the procedural requirement of s.188 was
fulfilled by the Federal Government authorising the courts to do so.  This
was allowed in this instance because evidence was available in the
territory of Pakistan and not Afghanistan.  In Muhammad Zubair v Government
of Pakistan 2014 PLD 31 Islamabad (a UK extradition application) it was
argued on behalf of the Requested Person that he had a right to be tried in
Pakistan where he would have certain rights not provided for in UK law.
The Islamabad High Court held that where the Federal Government had not
granted permission under s.188 (and no such permission had been granted in
that case) there could be no proceedings in Pakistan for an offence
committed in the UK.'4

4.2.4    An August 2014 International Journal of Humanities and Social
Science (IJHSS) article indicated that Article 3 of the Pakistan Penal Code
(PPC), relating to 'punishment of offences committed beyond, but which by
law may be tried within Pakistan', could be used to put a person on trial
in Pakistan for drug trafficking offences that had been committed abroad.
It stated:

'It should be noted that in Pakistan, trafficking of more than a kilogram
of a drug is punishable by death, and the sale of adulterated drugs (not
for medical purposes) carry lengthy prison sentences.  Further, such
offences committed by a Pakistani national, even if the crime was committed
outside Pakistani borders, can be tried under Pakistani courts.  According
to Chapter I, Article III of the Pakistani Penal Code (Act XLV of the Code
of 1860), 'Any person liable, by any Pakistan Law, to be tried for an
offence committed beyond Pakistan shall be dealt with according to the
provision of this Code for any act committed beyond Pakistan in the same
manner as if such act had been committed within Pakistan.'  Article III is
of significant importance to the issue of drug trafficking, as trafficking
frequently involves the sale of contraband across borders.'5

4.2.5    On 12 July 2019, the Pakistan Penal Code (Amendment) Ordinance,
2019, was promulgated by the President.  The Ordinance amends Article 3 of
the PPC, in which the following proviso was added: 'Provided that where the
accused has been extradited into Pakistan or brought into Pakistan under
any arrangement with a foreign country or authority other than extradition
or where against an accused any evidence is used in court which has been
obtained from a foreign country, the court, upon conviction, may punish
such accused with any punishment provided for that offence except
punishment of death'.6

2    Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, (s403), url.
3    FCO letter to CPIT, 12 April 2019, Annex A.
4    FCO letter to CPIT, 12 April 2019, Annex A.
5    IJHSS, 'The Treatment of Drug Offences in Sharia-Based Countries',
(page 59), August 2014, url.
6    The Gazette of Pakistan, 'Ordinance No. VI of 2019', 15 July 2019,
url."

    Annex A


In the 2019 CPIN at 4.2.2 the source is a FCO letter to CPIT of 12 April
2019 which appears at Annex A of the document.  It is necessary for the
purposes of this decision to set out part of Annex A;-

     "You have included the following enquiries:

Are there any facts and figures related to the willingness of the Pakistan
authorities to pursue overseas offences?  You have made it clear that this
is to be considered in the context of cases where there has already been a
conviction in the UK.  You ask whether the UK courts are considered to be
courts of 'competent jurisdiction'.  You have also asked about whether
there is any information as to the range of sentence passed with respect to
rape cases.

Double jeopardy

Principles of double jeopardy are dealt with under Article 13 of the
Constitution and s.403 of the Criminal Procedure Code.  I am not aware of
any equivalent to China's Article 10 CL.  Such research as we have been in
a position to conduct would suggest that the double jeopardy principles are
upheld where a decision has been reached in a foreign jurisdiction (as long
as the court reaching the decision is considered to be one of competent
jurisdiction - we have not found an example of a court in Pakistan
concluding that a foreign court was not of competent jurisdiction for these
purposes).  In the case of Rashid Hassan v The State 2010 Pr.CR.L J. 1902
the Sindh High Court examined and upheld an acquittal rendered by the Royal
Court of Jersey.  Article 13 and s.403 were specifically addressed.
Further, with respect to consideration of the question whether a UK court
is considered to be one of competent jurisdiction, regard can be had to the
case of Javed Akhtar v The State 2017 SCMR 1514.  In that matter the
Supreme Court upheld the validity of a sentence passed in a UK Crown Court
and reiterated the principle of Comity.

Offences committed outside of Pakistan

s.188 Criminal Procedure Code provides for the jurisdiction of criminal
courts and tribunals to extend to offences committed by a citizen of
Pakistan abroad.  Most of the case-law concerning this provision deals with
offences committed in the tribal and administered territories which do not
otherwise fall within the jurisdiction of the Pakistani courts.  In Abdul
Qadir Shah v MuhammadQasim PLD 2014 Balochistan 28, the High Court held
that in an instance where an offence of murder was committed outside of the
territorial restrictions of Pakistan (in a border town in Afghanistan) by
Pakistani citizens, the court did have the jurisdiction to proceed in
trying the case so long as the procedural requirement of s.188 was
fulfilled by the Federal Government authorising the courts to do so.  This
was allowed in this instance because evidence was available in the
territory of Pakistan and not Afghanistan.  In Muhammad Zubair v Government
of Pakistan 2014 PLD 31 Islamabad (a UK extradition application) it was
argued on behalf of the Requested Person that he had a right to be tried in
Pakistan where he would have certain rights not provided for in UK law.
The Islamabad High Court held that where the Federal Government had not
granted permission under s.188 (and no such permission had been granted in
that case) there could be no proceedings in Pakistan for an offence
committed in the UK.

Practical considerations & opinion

From the above it could be taken that the 'appetite' to reconvict for
offences committed outside of Pakistan and subject to proceedings elsewhere
does not appear to be high and would in any event be severely constrained
by the provisions referred to.  As I have previously indicated, I do not
have access to any facts or figures and would not claim that the above in
any way amounted to anything approaching exhaustive research.  Over and
above the legal restraints which would need to be overcome, there are
clearly also practical considerations which would be relevant to the
viability of any renewed proceedings.  This is a system in which rape
convictions (for example) are difficult to achieve.  There is significant
emphasis on a contemporaneously given ocular account (hence in part my
query about where the victim may reside) and there is also an expectation
of forensic evidence.  Where that evidence has been acquired in the UK, it
seems improbable in the extreme that it would be supplied to the Pakistan
for proceedings here - both because the individual had already been
convicted and because of death penalty concerns.

Sentence

There is no information available as to the actual sentences passed in
these types of cases.  However, it worthy of note that strict conditions
are required to be fulfilled before a court could take the view that a
death sentence could be considered.  Section 375 of the Pakistan Penal Code
defines the constituent elements of rape and Section 376 provides for
sentencing possibilities, which includes imprisonment of not less than 10
years up and up to 25 years and the death penalty.  Under Section 376, the
death penalty is applicable in aggravated cases falling under any of the
following descriptions:

1.   When rape is committed by two or more persons in furtherance of common
intention of all.

2.   When the rape is committed of a minor or a person with mental or
physical disability.

3.   When the rape is committed by a public servant including a police
officer, medical officer or jailor, taking advantage of his official
position.

4.   Where the rape is committed resulting in grievous bodily harm that
involves loss of any part of the victim's body or impairment or
disfigurement of such part as defined under sections 333, 335 and 337 of
the Pakistan Penal Code.

It may also be worthy of note that, although we have no data to support
this, it is our observation that courts are extremely reluctant to consider
a death penalty in the absence of a judicial confession.

There is a more recent report; Country Policy and Information Note
Pakistan: Actors of protection Version 1.0 June 2020 ("the 2020 CPIN")
which also deals with double jeopardy and says broadly the same as the
earlier 2019 CPIN.

Submissions

Mrs Aboni relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter and the various
documents prepared for the purposes of the hearing.  She drew my attention
to the absence of evidence of any deportee having been retried.  The expert
does not engage specifically with this issue.  There is no evidence to
corroborate the Appellant's evidence that the police visited his home.  She
relied on the CPIN 2019 with reference to Annex A.   She asked me to attach
little weight to the letter from the advocate in Pakistan and to treat the
isolated evidence with caution.  The background evidence does not support
the Appellant's case.

Ms Reid in submissions acknowledged the lack of evidence of specific cases
to support the Appellant's case.  However, she said that details of
individuals were not within the grasp of the expert.  She highlighted the
advocate's certificate that supports that one of the co-defendants has been
arrested.  She said that the Appellant's evidence before the First-tier
Tribunal was that he came about the certificate from his family in
Pakistan, who had made enquiries.  She referred to the prevalence of the
death penalty supported in the background information.  The law in Pakistan
allows for people to be charged with separate offences arising from the
same matter under two separate pieces of legislation.  She said that Annex
A clearly refers to offences of rape and does not consider drug offences.
It is therefore of limited evidential value.

Findings and reasons

It is baffling that Dr Holden is prepared to produce a report, but not
prepared to give live evidence.   I do not know whether solicitors were
aware of her position before instructing her to prepare a report.

The first issue to determine is whether it is reasonably likely that this
Appellant will be retried on return to Pakistan.  At paragraph 18 of Ms
Holden's report she states that she is not in a position to say whether the
Appellant will be tried and the remainder of that paragraph is concerned
with her view that the Appellant will nevertheless be detained or
threatened to be detained and subjected to physical violence or threat of
physical violence.  She goes on to talk about the conditions in prisons in
Pakistan.  The Appellant's case is not that he will be mistreated as a
failed asylum seeker, contrary to the evidence of Dr Holden. His case is
that he will be retried and faces the death penalty.

Dr Holden gives reasons why the law in Pakistan would not prevent the
Appellant from being retried but ultimately states she is not in a position
to say whether he will be tried or not.  This undermines her ultimate
conclusion at paragraph 18 in respect of this matter that she is of the
opinion that "the fear of the Appellant to be tried in Pakistan is highly
plausible".

Dr Holden relies on a Country of Origin Information Report dating back to
2008 in which the terms "court of competent jurisdiction" does not include
a court located outside Pakistan.  However, this conclusion is undermined
by the more recent background evidence to which there is no response from
Dr Holden, specifically paragraph 4.2.2 of the 2019 CPIN and Annex A (that
the FCO could not find an example of a court in Pakistan concluding that a
foreign court was not of competent jurisdiction).

While I take on board Ms Reid's submission in relation to Annex A, namely
that the British High Commission was concerned with rape cases, the issue
concerning whether UK courts are considered to be a court of competent
jurisdiction and the advice given was not with reference only to rape
convictions.  The research conducted by the FCO suggests that the double
jeopardy principles are upheld where a decision has been reached in a
foreign jurisdiction and that the FCO has not found an example of a court
in Pakistan concluding that a foreign court was not of competent
jurisdiction.  This information is not specific to an offence of rape.  It
is supported by the fact that Dr Holden was unable to give an example of
any individual having been prosecuted in Pakistan in breach of double
jeopardy principles.

Dr Holden relies on Article 3 of the Pakistan Penal Code, which allows the
law to try an individual for an offence committed beyond Pakistan.
However, this simply supports the Pakistani government having extra-
territorial jurisdiction.

Dr Holden highlights that the Law and Justice Commission noted the
ambiguity of the law since prosecution for the same offence is possible by
both ordinary courts and special courts created under the newly enacted
Control of Narcotic Substances Act 1997.  While this may well be the case,
I note that the Commission was requested to examine the issue in 1998 and
my attention has not been drawn to any individual having been prosecuted in
Pakistan for the same offences since then, never mind evidence that a
deportee has been retried for an offence.

Whilst there may be some ambiguity in Pakistani law, particularly in the
light of the 1997 legislation, there is simply no evidence of deportees
being retried for offences on return to Pakistan.  Despite a commitment by
the authorities in Pakistan to prosecute drug traffickers there is no
evidence that the Pakistani authorities wish to or intend to prosecute
individuals who have already been prosecuted in overseas courts.

Dr Holden's evidence is wholly unpersuasive and significantly out of date.

I have taken into account the evidence from the Appellant about visits to
his home in Pakistan by the police.  This was evidence that he gave before
the First-tier Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal rejected the Appellant's
evidence.  Again, I refer to the error of law decision.  There was no
successful challenge to the credibility findings. In any event, considering
that evidence in the round, if it is the case that the Appellant's family
was visited by the police, it is not reasonably likely in my view that this
concerned the Appellant's involvement in the 2014 offences.

I have taken into account the letter from the advocate in Pakistan
concerning one of the co-defendants.  However, I accept the Secretary of
State's submission in respect of this one isolated piece of evidence.  Its
reliability is undermined when considered in the context of the evidence as
a whole.  There is no background evidence which can point to any forcibly
returned offender facing punishment from the Pakistani authorities for the
same offence. I attach little weight to this evidence.

I have taken into account the letter from Mr Melvin of 1 August 2018.  This
piece of evidence is not wholly reliable bearing in mind it indicates that
the Appellant has been removed when that is clearly not the case.
However, it is not material.

The Appellant has failed to establish that he is at risk of being retried
in Pakistan. It is not necessary to consider the possibility of the death
penalty being imposed should be convicted.

Taking into account all the evidence, the Appellant has failed to establish
that his return to Pakistan would be in breach of the UK's obligations
under Articles 2 or 3 of ECHR.  Thus, his appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam               16 March 2021

