
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/07463/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 April 2019                          |On 20 December 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                    Ms K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant is a national of Albania who was born in 1991.  She claims to
have left Albania at the beginning of September 2014 and then travelled to
the UK by lorry, where she entered, clandestinely, on 25 September 2014.
She had come voluntarily with her fianc�, E, because of the poor economy in
Albania and in the hope that they would have a more prosperous life in the
UK.

At some stage the following month she was stopped by police in this country
and released.

It appears that by the time of her release she had parted from her fianc�;
she claimed that she did not tell the police that E was her fianc� because
he had told her that if she mentioned her relationship with him she would
be sent back home quicker.  That, at any rate, is the explanation she gave
in her asylum interview.

On release, she claimed that she approached a man, Z, because she had heard
him speaking Albanian on his phone and travelled with him to his house.
She claims that Z had raped her and forced her into prostitution by a
combination of threats to what he and his associates would do to her sister
if she did not do what they wanted and also that she would only be fed if
she worked for them.

She claims that she was able to escape because although she had been locked
in the house, one day they had left the door open and so she was able to
flee.

She realised in November that she was pregnant and her son was subsequently
born in the UK.

She did not report the rape to the police and only told her GP that she had
been raped in October 2015.

The appellant claims that having escaped after being held against her will
for two weeks by Z she had travelled to London and had contacted her family
in Albania (in October 2014) but her father had said to her that he did not
want anything more to do with her because of what had happened.  At this
stage (that is, October 2014) she had not known she was pregnant.

She claims that her father had issued threats against her and her child,
and that if returned, she would be at risk of ill-treatment from her
father, Z and his associates and also her fianc�, E.  She claims to have
been the subject of threats by all of them and that Z had also made threats
against her sister.

Because of the appellant's claim to have been trafficked in this country
(by being forced to engage in prostitution) consideration was given to
whether or not she had been a victim of trafficking but in a National
Referral Mechanism (NRM) decision of 25 February 2016 (which considered her
situation on the balance of probabilities) it was concluded that she had
not.  Her claim for asylum was subsequently refused on 8 July 2016.

The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal was heard
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid at Taylor House on 24 April 2017, but
in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 3 May 2017 Judge Reid dismissed
the appellant's appeal.

Permission to appeal was refused both by the First-tier Tribunal and also
by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Bruce) but the appellant was granted permission
to apply for judicial review of Judge Bruce's decision refusing to grant
permission to appeal, and as is usual in these cases, the respondent then
agreed that Judge Bruce's decision should be set aside, following which the
Vice President of this Tribunal, Mr Ockelton, granted permission to appeal,
in light of the High Court decision.  However, when giving his reasons, Mr
Ockelton reminded the parties "that the Upper Tribunal's task is that set
out in s.12 of the 2007 Act".  That is to say that this Tribunal has first
to consider whether or not Judge Reid's decision contained any material
error of law.

The appeal was accordingly listed before this Tribunal on 3 April 2019,
where I heard oral argument on behalf of both parties.

At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision, and within a
matter of days, having given anxious scrutiny to the submissions which had
been made and to all the documents within the file, I had reached my
decision.  I had not found this a difficult decision to make, for the
reasons which are now set out below, but regrettably, the file was then
mislaid, and, in the absence of any request from either party, the
promulgation of this decision was overlooked and it was not finalised or
promulgated when it should and but for the mislaying of the file would have
been.  The file having very recently come to light, I now promulgate this
decision; the decision is the one which I had originally intended to give,
but the Tribunal apologises to the parties for the delay.

The Appellant's Grounds

Both in her grounds of appeal and in the grounds in support of her
application for judicial review of UTJ Bruce's refusal to grant permission,
the appellant advanced two arguments.  The first was that, contrary to the
guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ
367, the judge had failed to factor into her assessment of the evidence the
medical evidence which she had accepted, that the appellant had suffered
trauma, suffered from PTSD and was accordingly "unable sometimes to be
entirely consistent or very clear about things".  The other ground was that
when focusing on the appellant's delay in claiming asylum, the judge had
failed to adopt the more nuanced approach which was required "when
assessing a trafficking claim" following the reasoning of Dove J in R v
SSHD on the application of FK [2016] EWCA 56 (Admin).  Extracts from both
these decisions (that is, Mibanga and FK) are contained both in the
original grounds and in the grounds in support of the application for
judicial review.

The Hearing

On behalf of the appellant, Mr Collins submitted at the outset that this
was "a trafficking case" but accepted that UTJ Bruce, when refusing
permission to appeal, had not been wrong to consider that this case did not
contain the "most medical evidence we can see" (Judge Bruce had described
the medical evidence as "limited" when stating in her reasons that "it is
not arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard to the
medical evidence (limited as it was) of PTSD and related symptoms".
However, Mr Collins submitted that even though the medical evidence was not
as strong as it might be in other cases the appellant was still a
vulnerable person.  He submitted that the judge, having accepted that the
appellant had suffered some form of trauma and that she had PTSD, and that
she had received counselling, although this was "not necessarily a Mibanga
case", and although the judge had referred to the medical evidence and the
expert evidence in the case, nonetheless this had not been "at the
forefront of her mind when she made her findings".  In particular, the
finding at paragraph 25 (that it was implausible that the woman who had
been keeping her secure in the house where she was forced to work as a
prostitute had forgotten to lock her in one day) was "unfair".

Mr Collins submitted that there had been five reasons for rejecting the
appellant's account.  The first was the delay in making her claim.  She had
not made an asylum claim until eight months after she had claimed to have
escaped from her imprisonment in the house where she had been forced to
work as a prostitute.  This was at the forefront of the judge's mind, but
it failed to take account of the guidance given by Dove J in FK that delay
was not unusual in trafficking claims.

The second reason for disbelieving the appellant's account was that the
appellant had claimed that she did not know where she was taken to.  His
submission on behalf of the appellant was that this was just the sort of
person who could be trafficked.  Her case was that her fianc� had gone back
to Albania, having abandoned her.  She had arrived in the UK illegally in a
lorry and was now on her own.

The third reason why the judge disbelieved her was the implausibility of
her escape, but she had not been in a prison.

The fourth reason was that the appellant had not told her GP about the
claimed rape until October 2015, and the fifth reason was that she had
never reported the rape to the police.

Although at the outset Mr Collins had appeared to agree that this was not
in terms a Mibanga point, he nonetheless submitted that the medical
evidence had effectively been rejected because of the adverse credibility
findings which the judge had made.  It was clear that the judge had
rejected wholesale the account the appellant had given of effectively being
trafficked after her arrival in the UK.

On behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke reminded the Tribunal that (as
stated earlier within this decision) the grounds only contained two
discrete arguments, that was the Mibanga point that the judge had not
properly factored in the mental health issues when considering credibility
in the round and secondly that the findings on delay were unsustainable in
light of Dove J's decision in FK.

This was a very well-reasoned decision and the judge had adequately
factored in her findings with regard to the appellant's mental health.  The
adverse credibility findings went far beyond the issues identified on
behalf of the appellant.  At paragraph 22 of her determination, the judge
had made findings with regard to credibility that even though she did not
"accept the entirety of the appellant's account" she nonetheless accepted
that she had been "through some trauma at some time for which she has
required counselling" and accepted further that that might mean that the
appellant was "unable sometimes to be entirely consistent or very clear
about things".

Then, at paragraph 23, the judge referred not just to the delay in the
appellant making her asylum claim, but that this delay occurred at a time
when she was pregnant and had a future child to think of.  The judge
accepted that finding out that she was pregnant was a shock to the
appellant and that her mental health issues might have been present from
this time, but considered that the delay affected her credibility because
she had not tried to get any advice or take any steps "to deal with the
prospect that she would be likely to be returned to Albania, even though
afterwards living with a supportive woman".

So, at this time, the appellant had been supported by a person in this
country and would have been mindful of the potential impact of forced
removal, but nonetheless took no steps to secure asylum in this country
during this period.

Then, at paragraph 24, the judge had considered specifically the
circumstances in which the appellant claimed to have been "trafficked" (by
being forced into prostitution).  In particular, the judge had found it
implausible that the appellant would simply follow a stranger without
knowing where she was going and that she did not even have a broad idea of
where she had been.  The appellant was an educated intelligent person, so
it was unusual that such a person would pay such little attention to her
surroundings.  Mr Clarke also emphasised that at this time it was not
suggested that she had any mental health issues, and nor was she a
vulnerable person.

With regard to what I have referred to as the Mibanga point, the judge had
not artificially separated the diagnosis of trauma from her adverse
credibility findings.  The judge noted the appellant's explanation of why
she had not told her GP what she said had happened to her until a year
afterwards, which was that she had seen a female GP, but, as the judge
noted (at paragraph 26), she had already seen a female GP at the beginning
of September 2015 when she had explained that she had had no contact with
her family.  The judge noted that this was not the first time therefore
that she had seen a female doctor and the issue of her lack of contact with
her family had come up previously.

The judge at paragraph 26 also referred to the daily headaches which the
appellant had told the GP she had been getting for a year and considered
that this also cast doubts on her account

"because it appears to be an attempt to link quite debilitating symptoms to
start a year before, i.e. to around the time she says she was raped and
held against her will, which symptoms she did nothing about, despite
accessing ante-natal care since around November 2014 ... which would have
involved regular checks on her and her baby".

As the judge noted, the appellant could have raised these headaches (if
they had occurred) "without explaining the circumstances in which they
started".  The judge had in mind also that there had been "no requirement
that she told her GP about the rape" and particularly given that she was
already arranging counselling.

Mr Clarke also asked the Tribunal to note that at paragraph 27 the judge
had also been concerned at the appellant never reporting the rape and
detention to the police, even though, on her account, Z had made threats
against her sister as well, so this would not just have been a case of
reporting what had happened to her, but also reporting a possible threat to
her sister.  The judge noted that this failure was at a time when she had
had support from Rape Crisis (since August 2015) and from Hestia (since May
2015) together with ongoing support from Solace Women's Aid.  Accepting
that there was no requirement to report rape or sexual exploitation, the
judge was entitled (in Mr Clarke's submission) to consider this, as she did
at paragraph 27, "a relevant factor in the assessment of whether the
claimed event happened".

With regard to the specific Mibanga point, there was no artificial
distinction between consideration of the medical evidence and the adverse
credibility findings.  The judge considered how her trauma might have come
about and was unable to make any positive findings, but all the evidence
was considered in the round.

With regard to the guidance given by Dove J in FK, that decision was very
specifically concerned with the case of a woman who had been trafficked
into the country, and is very far removed from the circumstances of this
case, where what is alleged is that having voluntarily arrived in this
country, this appellant was falsely imprisoned for a period of two weeks
and forced to work as a prostitute, but then escaped.  As the judge made
clear at paragraph 32 of FK, the issue in that case was whether the
respondent had complied with his own guidance regarding how trafficking
cases should be dealt with, and as to the mitigating circumstances which
needed to be addressed before an adverse credibility finding could be
reached.

In reply, when asked what the medical evidence had been which, it was said,
the judge had ignored when making her credibility findings, Mr Collins
accepted that there had not been an expert report "as such".  There had not
been any Istanbul Protocol compliant findings and those findings which
there had been had been very generalised.  However, the judge was aware of
the medical issues and the appellant's symptoms were in line with people
who had suffered from sexual violence and related trauma.  So far as the
Mibanga point was concerned, there had been no real analysis of the trauma
from which the appellant had been suffering.

Discussion

In my judgment, this was an extremely thorough and detailed decision, in
which the judge carefully took account of the arguments advanced on behalf
of the appellant (in particular that she was suffering from some trauma and
medical health problems) before considering that nonetheless she could not
accept the appellant's account.  The judge in particular had in mind that
the previous NRM decision had been made on the balance of probabilities,
and that she (the judge) was obliged to consider the issue of credibility
to a lower standard of proof.  Nonetheless, for the reasons which she gave,
the judge was unable to accept, even to the lower standard of proof, that
the appellant's account had been honest.

The judge's decision was one which was open to her and the grounds (and
submissions) in effect do not amount to more than a disagreement with the
factual findings which the judge made.  Given that at the time the
appellant claims to have gone with Z to his home, it is not suggested that
she was then suffering from any mental health problems, and that when she
left, she would have been in the public street, the judge was entitled to
find that it was remarkable that the appellant claimed to have had simply
no recollection of where she was or where she had been.  She could not even
recollect to which if any station she had gone.   The other factors which
the judge took into account were also relevant.

So far as the Mibanga point is concerned, the judge clearly did take
account of the appellant's trauma and her other mental health problems, and
the delay in the appellant making her claim was only one of the many
factors considered by the judge when reaching her decision in the round
rejecting the appellant's account.  The judge also specifically took into
account (at paragraph 22) that because of "some trauma" for which the
appellant had "required counselling", this "may mean that she is unable
sometimes to be entirely consistent or very clear about things".

However, these factors were not so compelling that the judge was required
to accept an account which for the reasons which are set out within the
decision (having given due allowance to the difficulties to which these
factors gave rise) the judge considered not to be credible.  The adverse
credibility findings were made in light of the judge's acceptance of the
need to give allowance to the difficulties the appellant might have in
being consistent, and were not made without regard to this factor.

So far as the decision of Dove J in FK is concerned, the facts in this case
are very dissimilar.  As already noted above, the delay in making the claim
was only one of the factors considered as relevant by the judge (and this
is a relevant factor) and the judge explained why, in her view, this
remained a relevant (albeit not necessarily a determinative) factor (for
example that the appellant would have had a need to consider the position
of her unborn child and also the alleged threats to her sister).

In these circumstances, there is no arguable error of law in Judge Reid's
decision and this appeal must accordingly be dismissed.

Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Reid is dismissed, there being no arguable error of law in the judge's
decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                Date: 18 December 2019
