
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07309/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2020                  |On 23 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     JA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox, Counsel, instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born in 1993.  He  arrived  in
    the UK in 2011 as a student.

 2. On 9 July 2019 the respondent made a decision to  refuse  a  protection
    and human rights claim.  The appellant appealed against  that  decision
    and his appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Bibi  ("the  FTJ")
    at a hearing on 2 September 2019.  The protection claim  was  dismissed
    but the appeal was allowed on human rights grounds  with  reference  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. Permission to appeal in relation to the decision  allowing  the  appeal
    under Article 8 was granted to the Secretary of State.   There  was  no
    appeal on behalf of the appellant in relation to the protection  claim.



 4. The Article 8 claim was in terms of the appellant's family and  private
    life.  He is married to a British citizen, the  marriage  having  taken
    place on 21 May 2019.  At the time of the hearing before the  FtJ  they
    were expecting their first child, in January 2020.

 5. The appeal comes back before me after a hearing  on  19  December  2019
    following which I decided that the decision of  the  FtJ  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds with reference to Article  8
    of the ECHR, was to be set aside for error of law and for the  decision
    to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The reasons I gave for finding  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in  her
    decision are as follows:

         "32. The FTJ was clear in her conclusions to the effect that  there
             would  not  be  insurmountable  obstacles   to   family   life
             continuing in Bangladesh for the reasons that  she  gave  from
             [65] which I have quoted.  That consideration included  taking
             into account the extent to which the family was settled in the
             UK, the extent to which they could provide for themselves (the
             FTJ finding that the appellant's wife could seek to find  work
             in Bangladesh), and their familiarity with  the  country  from
             which they both originate.

         33.  Whilst I do not rule out the possibility  that  an  individual
             may succeed on Article 8  outside  the  Rules  notwithstanding
             that there is a finding that there would be no  insurmountable
             obstacles to family life, here the FTJ's Article 8  assessment
             outside the  Rules  failed  to  have  regard  to  her  earlier
             findings in relation to insurmountable  obstacles.   Whilst  I
             acknowledge  that  the  FTJ  considered  the   position   with
             reference to the expected birth of their child, there does not
             appear  to  have  been  any  acknowledgment  of  the   earlier
             findings.  For example, the FTJ  earlier  concluded  that  the
             appellant's wife would be able to find work in  Bangladesh  or
             at least seek it.  She referred to the appellant and his  wife
             both  being  resourceful  individuals.   Those  are   relevant
             factors for her to have taken into account in  the  assessment
             of Article 8 outside the Rules.  Thus, at [75] the FTJ  seemed
             to accept at that point  that  the  appellant  would  have  no
             employment or income in Bangladesh, contrary  to  her  earlier
             findings.

         34.  At [70] the FTJ referred to [TZ (Pakistan) and  PG  (India)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
             1109] in particular [30] - [31].  The latter  paragraph  talks
             about the need for a Tribunal to factor into its evaluation of
             whether  there  are  exceptional  circumstances  in  terms  of
             Article 8 outside the Rules both the  findings  of  fact  that
             have been made and the evaluation of whether or not there  are
             insurmountable obstacles.  I am not satisfied that the FTJ did
             that in this case in her assessment of Article 8  outside  the
             Rules.

         35.  In addition, the FTJ's  assessment  of  the  Chikwamba  point,
             albeit  not  with  specific  reference  to  the  decision   in
             Chikwamba itself, erroneously concludes that the fact that the
             appellant would be unsuccessful in an  application  for  entry
             clearance  is  a  matter  that  militates   in   his   favour.
             Furthermore, the FTJ's decision in this respect fails to  take
             into account the limited circumstances in which the  Chikwamba
             principle applies.  I do not accept the contention  on  behalf
             of the appellant that the Chikwamba point is not raised in the
             grounds.

         36.  Similarly, I am not satisfied  that  the  FTJ  had  regard  to
             s.117B(4) of the 2002 Act which provides  that  little  weight
             should be given to a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
             partner that is established by a person at  a  time  when  the
             person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  That  is  not  to
             say that no weight can be attached to  that  relationship  but
             the FTJ ought to have given that statutory provision  specific
             consideration.  Whilst I  acknowledge,  as  was  submitted  on
             behalf of the appellant, that the FTJ noted at [79]  that  the
             appellant's stay in  the  UK  has  been  on  a  temporary  and
             therefore precarious basis, that is  not  a  consideration  of
             s.117B(4).  In addition, precariousness  under  the  2002  Act
             refers to private life considerations.

         37.  Further, whereas the FTJ cited [AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT
             0260 (IAC)], it seems to me looking at [80] of  her  decision,
             that she found that the fact that the appellant has shown that
             he has been financially independent in the UK  and  can  speak
             English were positive factors in his favour, contrary  to  the
             guidance in AM (Malawi).

         38.  For all these reasons, I am satisfied that the FTJ's  decision
             is marred by error of law in terms of Article  8  such  as  to
             require her decision to be set aside."

 7. In addition to the evidence that was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    for the re-making hearing there was an additional bundle consisting  of
    18 pages.  I heard oral evidence from the appellant and his  wife,  MP,
    which I now summarise.

    The oral evidence

 8. The appellant and his wife gave  evidence  through  an  interpreter  in
    Sylheti. The appellant adopted his witness statement  dated  23  August
    2019 in examination-in-chief.  In cross-examination he said that if  he
    is allowed to remain in the UK he would work.  His wife would  then  be
    the primary carer for their daughter, born on 23 January 2020.

 9. In Bangladesh he has two younger brothers who live with his mother in a
    property owned by the family.  He  has  offered  his  mother  financial
    support in the past.

10. He would not be able  to  live  with  them  in  Bangladesh  if  he  was
    returned, even temporarily, because he has financial problems and there
    is a lack of space.  He also has "asylum problems".

11. His siblings in Bangladesh do  not  work.   They  study.   There  is  a
    brother in France who supports them in their studies and a brother  who
    passed away left some money for them.

12. He does intend that his mother should meet her granddaughter,  even  if
    that involves him and his wife travelling to Bangladesh.

13. MP adopted her witness statements dated 23 August 2019 and 26  February
    2020, in examination-in-chief.  She is a British citizen and  does  not
    have any other nationality.  She works in a shop.  At the moment she is
    on maternity leave which ends in August this year.  She then intends to
    return to work.  She earns ï¿½10,000 per annum.

14. In cross-examination she said that she does not have any savings.   Her
    parents do not help her financially because she is  now  married.   She
    and her husband live in a housing association property for  which  they
    pay rent.  They have lived there for five years.

15. Her maternity pay is on the basis of a reduced amount each  month.   It
    does not include statutory maternity leave.  It is all paid for by  her
    employer.

16. She was born in Bangladesh and arrived in the UK on 8 December 2005  as
    a  Bangladeshi  national.   She  has  not  renounced  her   Bangladeshi
    citizenship.  They do go to Bangladesh on visits.  Her parents are here
    but her father's brothers are in Bangladesh.  She last visited in  2010
    and has not been back since.  She does not  still  have  a  Bangladeshi
    passport.

17. As to whether she would be entitled to go to  the  Bangladeshi  Embassy
    and renew her Bangladeshi passport, she said that if she needed to  she
    would be able to do so.

18. She would love to take her daughter to Bangladesh to meet her  paternal
    grandmother and maternal relatives.  At the moment she is too young but
    she hopes to do so when she grows up a little.

19. She intends to return to work in August even if her husband works full-
    time.  They had planned it so she would do morning shifts and he  would
    do evening shifts.  They would look after her in that way.

20. If her husband had to go back to Bangladesh to apply for  a  visa,  her
    mother would not be able to assist looking after their daughter because
    she does not know how to look after her as much as she does.   She  has
    her own house and family.  She also has a broken leg  so  it  would  be
    very difficult.  Her mother has her own problems  and  her  sister  and
    brother work.

21. Before she married she met her husband twice on 5 November 2018 and  28
    December 2018.  Her family knew everything about him and that he had no
    immigration status in the UK.  The decision-making power belongs to the
    father in the Bengali community.

    Submissions

22. In her submissions, Ms Cunha relied on the evidence that emerged during
    cross-examination.  She submitted that there would be no insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in Bangladesh.  On the question  of
    insurmountable obstacles, I was referred to Lal v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1925.

23. Ms Cunha further submitted that the appellant could  obtain  employment
    in Bangladesh.  He would be able to reintegrate and family  life  could
    continue.  His wife  was  born  in  Bangladesh  and  previously  had  a
    Bangladeshi passport.

24. In relation to GEN 3.2.(2), there were no exceptional circumstances  in
    this case.  Furthermore, in the alternative, the appellant could  apply
    for entry clearance.  As was said at [39] of TZ Pakistan and PG (India)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109,  the
    facts are not analogous to the circumstance in  Chikwamba  because  the
    outcome of a subsequent entry clearance application was not certain.

25. On the question of "reasonableness"  of  their  British  citizen  child
    leaving the UK, she could remain with her mother.  The fact is that she
    was born to a Bangladeshi family and one of them has precarious status.
     British citizenship is a weighty factor but it is not determinative.

26. They married in circumstances where they both knew of  the  appellant's
    precarious immigration situation.  The fact that he does not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules is a weighty factor.

27. In his submissions, Mr Wilcox argued  that  paragraph  EX.1(a)  applies
    because the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
    British citizen child.  The only reason that the Rules would  otherwise
    not be met is in terms of the financial requirements and therefore EX.1
    was relevant.  That provision replicated s.117B(6) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). GEN3.2  represents  a
    third stage but in practice the assessment outside  the  Rules  is  the
    same.

28. As regards Chikwamba, it is far from clear  that  the  appellant  would
    succeed in an application for entry clearance as they  would  not  meet
    the  minimum  income  threshold.   However,  Chikwamba  is  not  really
    relevant to the circumstances of this appeal.

29. Again, in relation to  paragraph  EX.1,  it  was  submitted  that  that
    provision is designed not only to comply with international obligations
    in terms of Article 8 but also the UN Convention on the Rights  of  the
    Child.  Mr Wilcox relied on the dicta in MA (Pakistan) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705.   It  was  submitted
    that although that case dealt with a child who has been in the  UK  for
    seven years, the same principle applies in  terms  of  British  citizen
    children.

30. The respondent's own  guidance,  interpreting  KO  (Nigeria)  &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  UKSC  53,  does  not
    indicate that it would be reasonable to expect a child to return to the
    country of origin with the child's parents.  I was referred to [18] and
    [51] of KO (Nigeria) in terms of the relevance of conduct, in  that  at
    [51] of KO (Nigeria), the parents' conduct was relevant only in that it
    meant that they had to leave the country.  It was in that context  that
    it had to be considered whether it was reasonable for the  children  to
    leave with them.

31. In this case one of the parents is a British citizen and  there  is  no
    question of her being required to leave the UK.  It was in the  child's
    best interests to remain in the UK because she is a  UK  citizen.   She
    does not have citizenship of Bangladesh, even if she could acquire  it.



    Assessment and conclusions

32. Since the hearing before me on  19  December  2019  there  has  been  a
    significant change in the family's circumstances with the birth of  the
    appellant and his wife's daughter on 23 January 2020.  The  appellant's
    wife is a British citizen and so also, therefore, is their daughter.

33. So far as findings made by the FtJ are concerned, Mr  Wilcox  submitted
    that it ought not to be a preserved finding that in terms of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles   to   the
    appellant's integration, Mr Wilcox relying on the fact that the  couple
    now have a child.

34. Whilst the relevance of his  having  a  child  to  his  integration  in
    Bangladesh is not immediately obvious, there was no  opposition  to  Mr
    Wilcox's proposition in that respect by Ms Cunha.  For my part,  I  can
    see that the changed family dynamic ought, in fairness,  to  mean  that
    this finding by the FtJ ought not to be preserved.  However,  I  cannot
    see how it could be said that there would be very significant obstacles
    to the appellant's integration in Bangladesh in circumstances where  he
    came to the UK in 2011 as an adult and when he has close family members
    in Bangladesh; his mother and siblings. In the circumstances, I do  not
    accept that there would be insurmountable obstacles to his  integration
    there.

35. Otherwise, as agreed between the parties, reflecting my own view of the
    extent of the findings that ought to be  preserved,  the  only  finding
    that realistically can be preserved  is  that  at  [74]  of  the  FtJ's
    decision, namely that the appellant's wife's family are all residing in
    the UK.

36. Both parties agreed that paragraph EX.1(a) must  be  considered.   That
    provides as follows:

         "EX.1.   This paragraph applies if

              (a)

                 (i)   the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                     relationship with a child who-

                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was  under  the
                           age of 18 years  when  the  applicant  was  first
                           granted leave on the basis  that  this  paragraph
                           applied;

                      (bb) is in the UK;

                      (cc) is a British Citizen or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                           continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                           preceding the date of application; and

                 (ii)  taking into account their best interests as a primary
                    consideration, it would not be reasonable to expect  the
                    child to leave the UK...".

37. The question to be answered then in relation to EX.1, is in  this  case
    whether, taking into account the child's best interests  as  a  primary
    consideration, it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
    UK.

38. The starting point must be to assess what is in the appellant's child's
    best interests.  Those best interests can,  probably,  incontrovertibly
    be said to be ideally to remain with both parents.

39. Similarly, I doubt that it  would  be  contentious  to  hold  that  the
    child's best interests are best served by her being able to  take  full
    advantage of the rights and privileges accruing to  her  as  a  British
    citizen.

40. Her best interests are to be assessed without reference to the  conduct
    of her parents.  Thus, in the context of the  child's  best  interests,
    the fact that her father has overstayed his leave  by  some  years  and
    that her parents started their relationship in circumstances where they
    both knew that the appellant's immigration status was  precarious,  and
    his stay was unlawful, are not to be taken into account.

41. The best interests assessment does, however, have to take into  account
    the "real world" scenario, as explained by  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria).  There it was said as follows:

         "19. [Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
             Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS  CSOH_117]  noted
             (para 21)  that  Lewison  LJ  had  made  a  similar  point  in
             considering the "best interests" of children in the context of
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

                  "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
                      interests of the children must be made on  the  basis
                      that the facts are as they are in the real world.  If
                      one parent has no right  to  remain,  but  the  other
                      parent does, that is the background against which the
                      assessment is conducted. If neither  parent  has  the
                      right to remain, then that is the background  against
                      which the assessment is conducted. Thus the  ultimate
                      question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
                      child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
                      the country of origin?"

             To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
             (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully  disagree.  There  is
             nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is  to
             be considered otherwise than in the real world  in  which  the
             children find themselves."

42. According to the appellant's witness statement dated 23 August 2019, if
    he  had  to  return  to  Bangladesh  it  would  mean  the  end  of  his
    relationship with his  wife  because  she  has  told  him  on  numerous
    occasions that she does not want to return to  Bangladesh.   She  fears
    she would not be able to  reintegrate  and  she  feels  that  the  best
    interests of their daughter lie in remaining in the UK.  He  refers  to
    the implications for him as a father and his daughter being brought  up
    without a father.

43. In her witness statement dated 23 August  2019,  the  appellant's  wife
    refers to all her family being in the UK and it  being  impossible  for
    her to reintegrate into Bangladesh.  She feels that her  (then  unborn)
    child's best interests are for her to remain in the UK.

44. Her further witness statement dated 26 February 2020 repeats  that  her
    parents and siblings live in the UK and she has no family or friends in
    Bangladesh.  She refers to their financial difficulties being likely to
    increase if they had to live in Bangladesh.

45. As regards their daughter, she refers to the privileges that she has in
    terms of access to  education,  healthcare  and  other  benefits  as  a
    British citizen and  their  hope  that  she  will  benefit  from  those
    advantages.  She contrasts that with the  situation  in  Bangladesh  in
    terms of healthcare and education.  She states at [7] that  it  is  now
    "more impossible" for her to  move  to  Bangladesh  to  continue  their
    family life and that if the appellant  has  to  leave,  their  daughter
    would be deprived of his fatherly guidance and emotional support  which
    is necessary for her  spiritual  and  intellectual  growth.   She  also
    refers to the difficulties  she  would  have  in  looking  after  their
    daughter on her own. She refers in this context to her  suffering  from
    depression for which she takes medication.

46. The "real world" scenario is that the appellant has no leave to remain.
     On the facts, I am satisfied that his wife is firm in her  commitment
    to her daughter in not wanting  her  to  leave  the  UK  and  lose  the
    advantages of British citizenship.

47. British citizenship is not, as has long been recognised, a  trump  card
    in an Article 8 case.  Nevertheless, it  is  a  matter  of  very  great
    significance. The evidence  in  this  case  reveals  that  if,  on  the
    hypothetical scenario, the appellant's daughter had to  leave  the  UK,
    aside from the advantages of British citizenship that  she  would  lose
    for as long as she was outside the UK, her mother would  not  have  the
    support that she has in the UK in terms of family.

48. I accept her evidence that she does not have family in  Bangladesh  and
    indeed it is a preserved finding that her family are  all  residing  in
    the UK.  Whilst there is no reason  to  think  that  the  appellant  at
    least, whilst his wife looks after their  daughter,  could  not  obtain
    employment,  it  is  reasonable  to   assume   that   their   financial
    circumstances would be less secure in Bangladesh than in the UK.

49.  The  appellant's  wife  would  be  looking  after   their   child   in
    circumstances where she lacks the immediate emotional support that  she
    is able to gain from her family in the UK and  in  circumstances  where
    she would be bringing up the child, albeit  with  the  support  of  the
    appellant, whilst suffering from depression.

50. The facts are clear in establishing that the child's best interests are
    to remain  in  the  UK  with  both  her  parents.  I  accept  that  the
    appellant's wife would not leave the UK with  their  daughter  to  live
    with the appellant in Bangladesh.  In  those  circumstances  the  child
    would be brought up with  her  father's  physical  presence.  Her  best
    interests are to be brought up in a family unit with both parents.

51. I also take into account what  was  said  in  (MA)  Pakistan  at  [49],
    namely:

         "However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
         years  would  need  to  be  given   significant   weight   in   the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point  that leave should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."

52. I agree Mr Wilcox's submission that  although  MA  (Pakistan)  did  not
    involve a child who was a British citizen, but a child who had lived in
    the UK for seven years or more, the same principles apply in  terms  of
    the need for there to be "powerful reasons" as to why leave should  not
    be granted. The Court of Appeal's analysis in MA (Pakistan) was  itself
    based on dicta in EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 which was itself a  case  involving
    British citizen children.

53. Taking all those factors into consideration, I am not satisfied that in
    this case it could be said to be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK, taking into  account  her  best  interests.  Thus,  I  am
    satisfied that paragraph EX.1(a) applies.  Accordingly, the  appeal  is
    to be allowed.  In those circumstances, there is no  need  to  consider
    Article 8 outside the Rules or with reference to GEN.3.2.

    Decision

54. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, the decision is
    re-made, allowing the appeal under Article 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Upper   Tribunal    Judge    Kopieczek                                 Date:
    08/04/2020







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email




