
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/08045/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 April 2019                           |On 24 September 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                TOR BIAR TOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Mustafa, Counsel instructed by Genesis Law
Associates Ltd
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on 18 October  2018  when  the
Vice President, Mr CMG Ockelton, presided.  We found an error  of  law  and
gave our reasons in a decision promulgated  on  9  November  2018  when  we
identified the respondent as "the claimant" and ruled that this was  not  a
case where there should be any restriction on reporting.  That remains  the
position.

2. We indicated then that we thought it unlikely that  there  would  be  any
need to hear further oral evidence and we were particularly concerned about
any difficulties the claimant might face as a male citizen of  South  Sudan
in the event of his return there.

3. The claimant had not produced any further evidence.  I  checked  with  Mr
Mustafa

4. To make quite sure that I had not overlooked  anything  and  I  had  not.
The Secretary of State produced (belatedly) an additional bundle  described
as "background evidence bundle" and also a "speaking note" provided  by  Mr
Jarvis. Sensibly,  there  was  no  objection  to  the  late  production  of
documents that are in the public domain.

5. It is for the claimant to establish, if he  can,  that  removing  him  to
Sudan would expose him to a real risk  of  "serious  harm"  as  defined  in
Article 15 of the Council Directive (2004/83/EC) (Qualification  Directive)
or, if he cannot do that, that removing him there would be contrary to  his
rights protected by Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

6. As we explained in finding that there was an error of  law,  the  "issues
that has  not  been  resolved  satisfactorily  in  this  case  concern  the
difficulties that [the claimant] might face as  a  male  citizen  of  South
Sudan if he is returned to that country".

7. I begin by considering the claimant's bundle.  The relevant  parts  start
with a report entitled "Soldiers Assume We Are Rebels" dated 1 August 2017.
  This  is  prepared  by  Human  Rights  Watch  and  carries  the  subtitle
"Escalating Violence and Abuses in South Sudan's Equatorias".

8. The report, helpfully, includes a map in which the  southern  regions  of
South Sudan are identified, from West to East as Western  Bahr  El  Ghazal,
Western Equatoria, Central Equatoria and Eastern Equatoria.  These  regions
border the Central African Republic,  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,
Uganda and Kenya.  The city of Juba is very close to the border of  Central
Equatoria and Eastern Equatoria.  It is well-known that  a  conflict  broke
out in Juba in December  2013  and  the  war  had  spread  to  the  Greater
Equatoria region so that "over  1,000,000  civilians,  many  of  them  from
villages in this region, have fled to neighbouring  countries.   More  than
700,000 crossed to Uganda alone".

9. The report continues:

  "Despite the signing in August 2015 of the Agreement for  the  Resolution
  of the Conflict in South Sudan (ARCSS), between the  government  and  the
  army opposition led by former  Vice  President  Riek  Machar,  the  Sudan
  People's Liberation Movement/Army in  Opposition  (the  IO),  attacks  on
  civilians have now become commonplace in the previously  stable  southern
  and western regions of the country.  Fighting between  government  forces
  and the IO in the Juba reignited in July 2016."

10. Dealing with conflict in the Greater  Equatorias  region  in  late  2015
human rights researchers:

  "documented the unlawful killing of at least 47 civilians from  the  Kajo
  Keji area in the former State of Central Equatoria, by government  forces
  between June 2016 and May 2017".

11. They also "documented the unlawful killing of at least thirteen men  and
one woman" all civilians by government forces during a largescale attack on
the town of Pajok in the former State of Eastern Equatoria.

12.  Less  dramatically  but  still   significantly   Human   Rights   Watch
interviewed witnesses to "dozens of cases of  arbitrary  detention  by  the
army" which included in many cases detention  in  shipping  containers  and
enforced disappearances which were denied by the authorities.  The majority
of detainees were beaten and tortured.  Human Rights  Watch  was  satisfied
that the "accounts show a clear pattern  of  government  forces  unlawfully
targeting civilians for killings, rape, arbitrary  arrests  disappearances,
torture, beatings, harassment and the looting, burning and  destruction  of
their property".

13.  The  reports  of  many   examples   of   government   soldiers   firing
indiscriminately in populated areas whether it  be  military  attacks.   No
regard was had for civilian safety.  Such shootings  were  used  to  instil
fear.  Little progress had been made in establishing an international court
to hold accountable those who had done wrong.

14. The report observed:

  "The impact of the violence and persistent abuses  against  the  civilian
  population is devastating.  Acute food  insecurity  is  widespread.   Six
  million South Sudanese, almost half the country's population, face severe
  food shortages.  The outflow of refugees continues at an  alarming  rate,
  uprooting entire communities and effectively emptying swathes of land, at
  one point 9,000,000 civilians  remain  internally  displaced,  with  some
  sheltering  on  UN  bases.   The  crisis  is  costing  the  international
  community billions of dollars."

15. There are reports making similar points from the  "New  Arab"  dated  22
February 2017 and "The East African" dated 14 August  2017.   This  is  not
duplication.  The incidents  are  not  necessarily  the  same.   There  are
examples of internal displacement  and  unjustifiable  behaviour  by  armed
forces.

16. A difficulty for the appellant is that the  background  evidence  bundle
provided by the Secretary of State  contains  more  recent  material.   Its
oldest report is dated May 2018.  The other  reports  are  in  February  or
March 2019.

17. Significantly, on 21 December 2017  the  belligerent  parties  signed  a
"Cessation of Hostilities  Agreement"  since  when  conflict  activity  has
reduced.

18. The report from the International Crisis Group dated 13  March  2019  is
not unhelpful to the claimant. It refers to plans for unifying  a  national
army and drawing internal boundaries as "lagging far behind  schedule"  and
expresses the concern that the disturbances of recent years will return  if
the opportunity for resolution is lost.

19. I have looked particularly at a report from the United Nations  Security
Council dated  28  February  2019.   It  begins  by  referring  to  "modest
progress"  in  implementing  agreement.   Nevertheless  it  said  that  the
"permanent ceasefire was upheld in most parts of the country and confidence
building among the parties continued".

20. Under the heading at (III) "Security  Situation"  the  report  notes  at
paragraph 17 that the:

  "... ceasefire continued to hold in most of the country and  the  overall
  security situation improved.  Violence generally declined amid increasing
  rapprochement between government authorities, then  SSPDF  and  the  pro-
  Machar SPLA in opposition at the local level".

21. The same report acknowledged that tensions  "remained  high  in  Central
Equatoria" and there was an incident of killing seven  people  in  December
and the killing of nineteen civilians in January.

22. The report at (IV) "Humanitarian Situation"  acknowledged  that  by  the
end of December there were 1.87 million women, men and  children  who  were
internally displaced and 2.27 million displaced to neighbouring  countries.
This is clearly indicative of very significant past displacement.

23. However I  must  look  at  the  present  situation.   I  acknowledge  Mr
Mustafa's reminder of recent evidence of considerable difficulties but  not
since the ceasefire was announced. I also accept that the  ceasefire  might
prove to have introduced a welcome truce rather than a  resolution  of  the
conflict but there is no evidence of the truce (if  that  is  what  it  is)
breaking down in way that creates a real risk to the claimant.

24. I really can do no better than adopt a phrase I take  from  Mr  Jarvis's
speaking notes because, with respect, I think they go right to the core  of
the matter.  He says, having acknowledged the evidence of displacement  and
the existence of reports of breaches of human rights in a variety of ways:

  "In that respect the SSHD asserts that the figures at paras 45-51,  pages
  9-10 of general deaths and injuries, (not  specific  to  civilians)  from
  across of whole of South Sudan over the relevant  period  are,  with  the
  most respect to the victims, (whether civilian or not), very small in the
  context of the overall population of the country which was estimated,  as
  of 2017, at 12,575,714 by the World Bank."

25. It is difficult to write  these  decisions  without  appearing  callous.
One human death is a tragedy and one abuse of human rights is one too  many
but international protection mechanisms do not extend to the population  as
a whole unless there is a "serious and individual threat  to  a  civilian's
life or  person  by  reason  of  discriminate  violence  in  situations  of
international or internal armed conflict".  The evidence does not support a
conclusion of there being such a risk in this case.  The appellant would be
returned to a country where he would find it difficult to obtain  any  kind
of work because the economy generally has been shattered by war  and  where
there is a slight risk of injury because of violent  disturbance  but  that
risk is "slight" rather than "real" and the economic difficulties  are  not
nearly as severe as they would be to invoke the protection  of  Article  3.
Further he has the advantages of coming from  the  largest,  Dinka,  tribal
group and having been  educated  to  a  high  standard  and  having  gained
experience running a small business. He can be expected to cope.

26. In simple terms  the  case  cannot  succeed  on  the  evidence  that  is
available.  The more recent evidence all points to a difficult country that
is improving and the risks necessary to establish a claim for international
protection have not been established.

27. It follows that having set aside the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  I
remake and dismiss the appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.

Notice of Decision

28. The claimant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
dismissed.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 September 2019              |



