
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08582/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 February 2020                   |On 4 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  mr M W l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Counsel instructed on a Direct Access
basis
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tam, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan who was born on 20 April  1986.
    He came to the UK as a student on 23 April 2011 and made  a  subsequent
    application for an extension  of  leave.   His  sponsor's  licence  was
    revoked on 19  February  2013.   The  Appellant  then  made  a  further
    application but this was  refused,  however  his  appeal  against  that
    decision  was  allowed  on  30  April   2014.    There   was   then   a
    reconsideration, a further refusal  and  a  further  appeal  which  was
    dismissed and the  Appellant  became  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  22
    November 2016.

 2. On 3 February 2017 the Appellant claimed asylum on the  basis  that  he
    had a well-founded fear of persecution in Pakistan on the basis of  his
    sexual  orientation.   His  appeal  was  dismissed,  he  made   further
    submissions and following a judicial review he was given the  right  of
    appeal.  His appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Holt
    for hearing on 10 October 2019.

 3. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on  15  October  2019  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal for a number of reasons, finding essentially  that
    the Appellant's claim was not a credible one.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought, in  time,  on  a  number  of  grounds:
    firstly, that the judge erred materially in  law  in  failing  to  take
    documentary evidence into account and in failing to give  the  evidence
    anxious scrutiny; secondly, in failing to  take  the  contents  of  the
    Appellant's detailed witness statement into account and making material
    errors of fact; thirdly, the judge materially erred in law  in  failing
    to give anxious scrutiny to the witnesses' oral evidence.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney on
    29 November 2019 on the basis:-

         "It is arguable that the  judge  found  the  Appellant  lacking  in
         credibility for reasons  of  plausibility  rather  than  by  having
         regard to the available evidence.   Paragraphs  27(ii),  (iii)  and
         (vii) are examples of this. The judge rejects evidence based on her
         own assumptions and opinions without making  clear  findings  about
         the evidence itself.

         The grounds of appeal disclose an arguable error of law."

    Hearing

 6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the Appellant was  represented
    as he was before the First-tier Tribunal by Mr  D  Maqsood  of  Counsel
    instructed on a Direct Access basis.

 7. Mr Tam, on behalf of the Respondent, submitted at the  outset  that  he
    was able to accept that there were material errors in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, that this was in relation to a failure by  the
    judge to apply anxious scrutiny to the witness  evidence  and  to  have
    regard to the documentary evidence.

 8. Mr Tam stated that he also agreed with the observations of Judge Swaney
    in the grant of permission to appeal,  specifically  in  terms  of  the
    evidence of the witnesses recorded by the judge at paragraph  27(i)(a).
    The witnesses only knew the Appellant after  he  had  made  his  asylum
    claim and therefore the  judge  could  not  properly  utilise  this  to
    undermine the Appellant's credibility in failing  to  make  an  earlier
    asylum claim.

 9. Mr Tam also acknowledged that the Appellant had submitted a letter  and
    copy of the passport of one of his former partner's which the judge had
    not properly taken into account on the basis, which Mr Tam accepted was
    unsustainable, that he was not a longstanding or committed partner.

    Findings and Reasons

10. In light of Mr Tam's helpful concessions I find material errors of  law
    in the Decision and Reasons of Judge Ford, in particular:

10.1.    Whilst Devaseelan applied in light  of  the  previous  decision  of
First tier Tribunal Judge  Ford, who heard an appeal  by  the  Appellant  on
the papers on 8.12.17, I agree  that  at   [27](i)(a)  First  tier  Tribunal
Judge Holt fell  into  error  in  assuming  that  the  Appellant's     three
witnesses, who had all been granted refugee status on  the  basis  of  their
sexual   orientation, had been known to him prior  to  him  making  his  own
asylum claim,     when the evidence before the Judge was that he met all  of
them after he made his     claim: [18] of the grounds of appeal refers.

10.2.    At [27](ii) the Judge held against the Appellant that there was  no
reliable evidence of   any  longstanding/committed  gay  partner,  when  the
only witness asked about this    was  his  current  partner  and  there  was
evidence from at least one former partner in     the appeal bundle.

10.3.    It is further apparent from the terms of the Judge's  decision  and
reasons that the  observation by Judge Swaney,  in  granting  permission  to
appeal, is correct and  Mr   Tam  properly  conceded  as  much.  It  is  not
appropriate for a Judge  to  make  findings      based  on  assumptions  and
opinions eg  as  to  the  Appellant  having  constructed  an      artificial
lifestyle of  "gay  activities"  rather  than  make  clear  and  sustainable
findings      on the evidence that was actually before her.

11. I remit the appeal for a hearing de novo to the First-tier Tribunal  in
    Manchester.  An Urdu interpreter  will  be  required  and  the  hearing
    should be listed for three to four hours.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 12 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
