
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09807/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2020                 |On 26 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     P Y
                            (ANONYMITY in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman, Counsel, instructed by Sterling Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpreter:  Ms Dhankumari R Gurung attended to interpret the Nepalese and
                    English languages.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I reinforce the anonymity order made when I found  an  error  of  law  in
this case. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the appellant is an asylum seeker.

2. The case first came before me with the case of the  appellant's  husband.
The appellant is a citizen of Nepal and her husband a citizen of India.  In
summary, I found no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
to dismiss the appeal of  the  appellant's  husband  against  the  decision
refusing him international protection.  He can go to India, his country  of
nationality.  I did find the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  in
dismissing the appeal of this appellant.

3. I append hereto and incorporate into  this  decision  the  "Decision  and
Reasons" promulgated on 27 January 2020.

4. At the start of the hearing Ms Cunha contemplated  amending  the  refusal
letter to reflect the appellant's husband's  circumstances  but  there  was
really no question of the appellant being returned to  India.   It  may  be
that this appellant could establish herself in India if that  is  what  she
chose to do. It is not something I have had to consider. She does not  wish
to live in India.  She has claimed asylum in the United Kingdom and she  is
a  national  of  Nepal  outside  her   country   of   nationality   seeking
international protection.

5. Again in outline,  for  the  purposes  of  introduction,  there  are  two
strands of evidence in this case.  The first, which I outline below, is the
oral evidence of the appellant and her husband and the second is the expert
evidence provided by the appellant which I will consider in more detail.

6. It is for the appellant  to  prove  her  case  to  the  low  "real  risk"
standard.

7. The witnesses each gave oral evidence remotely.  In order to prevent  the
suspicion of coaching or improper influence the  appellant's  husband  left
the room when his wife, the appellant, gave evidence.

8. The appellant adopted her statement dated 6 September 2020.  She did  not
use the interpreter.

9. I outline that  statement  now.   She  explained  there  that  she  is  a
Nepalese national and  her  husband  an  Indian  national.   The  appellant
entered the United Kingdom in November 2009 as a student  with  leave  that
was extended  until  2014.   In  2014  she  applied  for  leave  to  remain
identifying the husband as her dependent.  The appeal was  based  on  their
private and family lives.  The appellant's husband  applied  for  leave  to
remain in April 2015 as a Tier 2 Migrant and the application was refused in
July 2015.  The appellant's application was refused at about the same time.
 She was advised by someone identified rather vaguely  as  "the  agent  who
helped her husband" that they could apply for indefinite  leave  to  remain
and that is what they did.

10. The appellant explained that she first met her husband in March 2012  at
a friend's house party.  They were attracted  to  each  other  and  quickly
realised that their relationship was special and they  became  very  close.
They began "dating" and in June  2012  started  to  cohabit.   They  had  a
religious marriage on 14 December 2012 and registered their marriage on  15
February 2013.

11. In October 2012, so that is after she had started to cohabit but  before
she married her husband, the appellant had a telephone call from her mother
to say that the family had found a man for her to marry.  He was one of the
sons of the leader of the political party that her family supported.

12. The appellant is not  surprised  at  this.   She  knew  there  had  been
previous attempts to arrange a marriage between her and the sons  of  other
political leaders.

13. The appellant was not frank with her mother.  She told her that she  was
not ready for marriage.  She did not feel able to tell her mother  at  that
stage that she was already involved in a serious relationship.

14. Her mother continued to make telephone calls  urging  the  appellant  to
return and marry.  Eventually she told  her  that  she  had  established  a
relationship with a man in the United Kingdom and she was  going  to  marry
him.

15. The appellant described her mother as "angry and disappointed"  and  her
father had threatened to ensure that her husband would be killed if he  saw
him and warned them that they would  not  "get  away"  with  marrying  each
other.

16. She said that she knew her father and  uncle  were  capable  of  torture
because when she was a young child a cousin had run away with a  man  of  a
different caste.  Her uncle managed to  bring  back  into  the  family  his
daughter, the appellant's cousin, and, according to the appellant, the  man
she ran away with was never seen again.  She did not know what had happened
to him but she had seen her cousin beaten and tortured in front  of  family
members.

17. Soon after that the cousin was "married off" to a  much  older  man  and
had children with him.

18. The appellant described her family as "very strict" and  that  it  would
be shaming for the family not to  fall  in  line  with  the  plans  for  an
arranged marriage and it would also diminish the status of the  family  and
she would be punished.

19.  That  the  appellant's  chosen  husband  was  an  Indian,  rather  than
Nepalese, national aggravated the hurt significantly.  They wanted  her  to
marry a Nepalese man of the same caste and background.

20. The appellant said her father had filed a complaint  about  her  husband
with the police authorities in Nepal.  She had learned about  that  from  a
distant cousin in the police.  She said her family members  all  knew  that
she had run away with an Indian man and that  her  father  and  uncle  "are
planning to catch me".  She said she had obtained a copy of  the  complaint
through a distant cousin and she had paid 10,000 Nepalese rupees, which she
estimated to be about ï¿½68, to get a photocopy of the complaint.

21. The appellant said that  during  her  asylum  interview,  when  she  was
detained, she was particularly asked why she had chosen  to  marry  someone
knowing that it would cause strong opposition in the family.  The appellant
said that she came to the United Kingdom intending to study, not to  marry,
but she fell in love with someone and did not  want  to  think  about  life
without him.  She thought being away from their families would  allow  them
to establish a peaceful private life but it did not happen.

22. The appellant said that feared that in the event  of  her  removal  from
the United Kingdom she would be separated from her husband and left without
support, particularly if he was removed to India and  she  was  removed  to
Nepal.  She said that she and her husband follow the same religion but they
are from different  castes  and  countries  and  their  marriage  would  be
disapproved to the point that was a serious risk that they would be  killed
if they went to Nepal.

23. The appellant described her family as "very influential  in  Nepal"  and
her uncle as a powerful politician.  She identified the position he had  in
the Congress Party and political work he had carried out (see  paragraph  7
of statement).

24. She said that she had provided photographs that she  had  obtained  from
her uncle's Facebook page.  They feature at pages 69 to 77 in  the  bundle.
I have looked at them.  I do not regard them as particularly compelling but
they certainly show someone identified as the  appellant's  uncle  in  what
appears to be public occasions in which he is carrying out the  work  of  a
prominent politician. The  photographs  may  well  show  him  addressing  a
meeting and presenting prizes or an award.

25. The appellant then took issue with points taken in the refusal letter.

26. There she was criticised for not claiming asylum in 2012.  She  accepted
that she had not claimed asylum in 2012  when  her  relationship  with  her
husband began and she realised that it would be problematic if the married.
She repeated that she had leave to be in the United Kingdom at  that  point
and did not think of claiming asylum.

27. She said the Secretary of State misunderstood her evidence  about  being
in contact with her mother.  She had had frequent contact with  her  mother
but that had stopped when  her  mother  realised  that  she  had  formed  a
relationship with a man and that she intended to stand by him.

28. She acknowledged the criticism that she had not provided evidence  about
her uncle and father being influential figures in Nepal.  She said she  was
not on good terms with her family and could not ask them to help.  She  had
tried to obtain what she could "online" and  made  that  available  to  the
Secretary of State.

29. She said that during  her  asylum  interview  the  interviewing  officer
tried to search her  uncle's  name  using  "Google"  and  she  assumed  the
Secretary of State had found the same information that she had found.   She
had submitted photographs of her uncle's activities.

30. She also said she had found out that her father and uncle were  involved
in a clash using weapons, including knives, in which they were both injured
and she said this showed that there was conflict including violence amongst
political leaders in Nepal.

31. She believed the Secretary of State had downplayed what she regarded  as
an important element in her case, namely that her family members had  their
own political agenda, and that both  her  refusal  to  accept  an  arranged
marriage and her decision to marry an Indian man  from  another  caste  was
shaming for the family in part because it frustrated those ambitions.

32. She said that as a daughter of a high caste family with  an  influential
father she would be regarded as property who could be  used  to  trade  for
political  connections.  She  had  frustrated  those  intentions.  She  was
consequentially at risk of domestic abuse and  the  police  would  have  no
interest whatsoever in helping her.

33. I do not regard it as particularly important to the decision I  have  to
make in this appeal but the appellant also gave reasons why she thought her
husband would be at risk in  India.   She  believed  that  her  family  had
sufficient power to find them in India and cause them harm.

34. She believed that if she were returned to  Nepal  she  would  "have  the
same fate as my cousin", that is to be beaten and tortured in front of  the
family.  She believed the family would never forgive her but would  subject
her to constant scrutiny and members of her family would kill  her  husband
if they could find him.

35. She also gave as a reason for not claiming asylum earlier  wrong  advice
(not from her present representatives) that she was eligible for indefinite
leave to remain.

36. She then identified the person who provided that bad advice.

37. The appellant said she became pregnant in 2017 but miscarried.

38. She then embarked on a very troubling strand  in  her  evidence  raising
matters which she said she had not been able to tell her  husband  until  a
long time after they were married.

39. The appellant said she was forced into marriage in Nepal  when  she  was
17 years old.  Her first husband was about seven years older than  her  but
she could not remember exactly.  He was the "late brother" of the  man  her
parents wanted her to marry in 2012.  She did not know  her  first  husband
before marriage and did not even know she was getting married until about a
month before the ceremony and after some preparations had been  made.   She
had only just finished school and was looking forward to college life  when
she was told she had to marry.  After marriage she went to  live  with  her
husband and his family in Nepal.  Her husband was an alcoholic and  treated
her badly.  He used to beat her.  His family beat her too and she was  made
to work life a servant, cooking and cleaning and felt she was in prison and
contemplated killing herself.  Indeed she did attempt suicide  after  about
six months of marriage.  She took an overdose of sleeping pills and  became
unconscious.  The family were told that she had food poisoning but it was a
suicide attempt that was kept secret.

40. When she left hospital she stayed with her parents for about a week  and
was then taken back to her in-laws' family.  Her in-laws did not  want  her
if she attempted suicide again because that would damage  their  reputation
but her father and uncle assured them that it would not happen again.

41. She planned another suicide attempt, this time wanting to hang  herself.
 She wrote a suicide note.  It is her sister-in-law who read the  note  and
she was punished very severely.  Her mother-in-law beat her before her  own
family arrived and when they did her father beat her too.

42. Her mother tried to persuade her to calm down and  come  to  terms  with
her new life.  She became pregnant and gave birth to a son when she was  19
years old.

43. When she was six months pregnant  her  first  husband  died  in  a  road
traffic accident.  She moved back to her own family home.  Her  family  did
not welcome her but as she no longer had a husband she was not tied to  her
in-laws.

44. The family regarded her as "unlucky".  She then gave reference to  Hindu
astrology and explained how within that way of thinking she was unlucky and
being unlucky had caused problems for her first spouse.

45. In 2007, a few years after  she  gave  birth,  she  started  pursuing  a
bachelor's degree.  She did attend college but studied from home caring for
her son.  Her family discouraged that and wanted her  to  remarry  but  she
refused.

46. After a couple of years  the  call  to  remarry  became  stronger.   She
regarded her husband's younger brother as worse than  her  former  husband.
He was a violent alcoholic.  She described her  in-laws'  family  as  "very
powerful".  Her late husband's  father  was  in  a  high  position  in  the
Congress Party and her husband's paternal aunt was very influential and she
produced an article about her in the bundle.

47. The appellant said that she wanted to  study  and  came  to  the  United
Kingdom to escape her family.  She had to persuade her family to allow  her
to study abroad by promising to  return  to  marry  her  husband's  younger
brother but that was never her intent.  Her in-laws would not allow her  to
bring her son with her to the United Kingdom  because  they  suspected  she
would not return if she kept her son.  She described a  painful  separation
in 2009 when she left her son behind, wondering  when  she  would  see  him
again.   He  attends  a  boarding  school  in  India  where  his   paternal
grandparents pay the fees.  She was not able to tell  her  present  husband
about her first marriage and child until two years after she  was  married.
She was afraid of losing him.  He was  shocked  but  forgave  her  for  not
telling him and wanted her to do the best for her child.

48. She said she had not told anyone outside the village where she  grew  up
about her personal history.  It was  a  private  matter  and  she  was  too
ashamed about things  to  tell  the  Home  Office  when  she  had  a  first
opportunity.

49. She had difficulty obtaining evidence about  her  first  marriage.   She
said there was a religious marriage but she was not aware of  any  marriage
certificate and suspected there was not one.  She did provide evidence of a
child in the form of a birth certificate and passport issued in the name of
the father and her name appeared on a passport because the father was dead.

50. She had tried to contact the hospital where she went  after  taking  and
making her first suicide attempt, the record keeping in Nepal is  poor  and
not computerised generally.

51. She believed that she was safe in  the  United  Kingdom  and  could  not
imagine life outside it.  She and her husband had established a network  of
friends.  They had no criminal convictions  and  wanted  to  contribute  to
society and not be a burden on it.  She said that they had a  son  born  in
June 2020 and wanted to bring him up in peace and safety.

52. Pages 82 and 83 of the bundle show a printout from a  "Wiki"  website  a
woman identified by the appellant as a relative and politician as a  member
of the Nepali Congress Party who had been appointed a government minister.

53. The appellant was cross-examined.

54. She said that her son who was born in the United Kingdom  in  June  2020
was not registered with the Nepalese authorities.  She did not know how  to
register a birth in Nepal and had no intention of registering his birth.

55. She said she did have a child in Nepal but he was looked  after  by  her
ex-husband's family.  She said there was no formal arrangement  such  as  a
custody order but they were paying. She talked to her child every Saturday.
 He was at boarding school. She understood that he saw her family in Nepal.

56. The appellant confirmed that her father had opposed her marriage to  her
husband.  She had told her mother that she was going to  marry  before  the
marriage and that she was marrying an Indian and she knew her parents  were
opposed to it.

57. Her parents had not signed any deed to permit the  marriage.   She  said
that was not necessary in the United Kingdom.  It would have been in Nepal.
She said she did not need authorisation from a family member  to  marry  in
the United Kingdom.

58. She was taken to her evidence about a complaint  being  made  about  her
husband to the authorities in Nepal.  She  said  that  she  had  found  out
through a distant cousin.

59. She was asked what the point was in making a complaint about a  man  who
was in the United Kingdom.  She said her father wanted to lay a  foundation
to complain in the event of his return to Nepal.  She appreciated that 2013
is some time ago but believed the complaint was still alive.  She  had  not
taken any legal advice from anyone in Nepal about its status.

60. She identified by name the first cousin  who  had  helped  her  get  the
documentation but she did not have a witness statement from him  confirming
his involvement.

61. The appellant confirmed that she no longer spoke  to  her  mother.   She
did speak sometimes to the person who found the documents.   She  said  she
contacted him to see if he could help.  They were not in touch regularly.

62. The appellant was asked to explain how the conversation  was  initiated,
for example did she receive a call to say there was a  police  report.  She
said that he contacted her. Her mother's aunt initiated the  contact.   Her
great aunt used to visit her parents' home  and  may  have  seen  what  had
happened and decided to make sure the appellant knew.  The  appellant  made
it plain that she was speculating and did not know how it had  come  about.
She could not explain why her father had made known what he had done.

63. The appellant denied any  suggestion  that  her  uncle  was  engaged  in
promoting equality between the castes.   She  recognised  that  the  expert
evidence was there were many people with the same name as her alleged uncle
and she had no photographs of her with her uncle.

64. The appellant was asked if she could explain why her father  would  risk
his own reputation  by  killing  someone  that  his  daughter  loved.   The
appellant said that the harm done by the appellant  avoiding  the  arranged
marriage was the greater harm.

65. The appellant confirmed that her first marriage was arranged.

66. The appellant confirmed that she came to the United  Kingdom  to  study,
rather than marry and that her parents paid for her studies.  She completed
a diploma and some NVQ levels, all paid for by her father.  He did not  pay
living expenses.  She worked but he paid the fees.

67. She confirmed that even though her father wanted her to  marry  he  paid
the price of the study in the United Kingdom.

68. She said that she had lied  to  her  parents  about  her  intentions  to
return.  She wanted to escape from the intended marriage.

69. She agreed that she had said she would not be able to  provide  evidence
about her first  child  but  she  now  provided  a  birth  certificate  and
passport.  She said this had all come with the assistance of her cousin  in
Nepal.  There was no one else in Nepal to help  her.   She  said  that  her
cousin did not contact her and was scared to get involved but  did  respond
when she pleaded for help.

70. The appellant was re-examined.

71. She said that her parents had very conservative attitudes  to  marriage,
including attitudes to reputational damaged if she did  not  comply.   They
took a different attitude to education.  It did not  dishonour  the  family
name for her to be educated, it did dishonour the family name for  her  not
to marry in accordance with their wishes.

72. The appellant's husband gave evidence.  I  identify  him  as  "KS".   He
adopted his statement made on 6 September 2020.

73. This shows he is a national of  India  and  married  to  a  national  of
Nepal.

74. He confirmed the outline history of his relationship given by his wife.

75. He came to the United Kingdom in May 2010 as a  student  and  his  leave
was extended until a date in 2016 but then curtailed to February 2015.   He
made an unsuccessful application for  leave  under  Tier  2  and  then  was
included in the human rights claim made by his wife in November 2014.  They
did not pursue that decision when it was  refused  because  they  had  been
advised incorrectly they were eligible for indefinite leave to remain.

76. He said he and his wife sought  asylum  when  they  realised  they  were
overstayers at risk of removal.  They were frightened of his wife's family,
even if they tried to live in India. His wife's father had reported him  to
the police because he had married her.  They feared being killed,  arrested
or tortured by members of the appellant's family  who  he  understood  were
powerful and influential.

77. He explained that he believed his wife's family would  track  them  down
in India and he explained why he took that view  even  though  India  is  a
large country.

78. He believed that he had been reported to the  police  in  Nepal  by  the
appellant's father and he believed the Indian police would  cooperate  with
the Nepalese authorities.

79. He explained the difficulties in returning to India  and  how  angry  he
had made his family by marrying.  He  emphasised  how  family  support  was
crucial to life in India or Nepal because of the way  society  worked.   It
was very difficult to obtain secure  employment  or  accommodation  without
family support.

80. He confirmed he did not know about his wife's  first  marriage  when  he
married her and it was a big shock when he discovered that when she married
she was widow and a mother.  He said it was not something that  was  talked
about in their culture because of the stigma attached to a  woman  who  had
been married previously and had a child  and  a  husband  even  though  the
husband had died.  He was very upset not to be told but he had already made
his decision to take care of her. He was not going to leave her  and  would
like to be a father to the child.

81. He did not disclose these matters when he first  claimed  asylum.   They
were sensitive and it was painful for  his  wife  and  harmful  to  her  to
discuss them.

82. He believed the way that the appellant had been treated  was  common  in
India and Nepal.  It is what happened to young women in those societies.

83. He further believed that there were  reasons  connected  with  astrology
that made things very problematic.

84. He confirmed he wanted to live peacefully in the United Kingdom and  was
pleased that he and his wife now had a son.

85. He was cross-examined.

86. He confirmed he did not know his wife had been married  previously  when
he married her.  His wife had told him that her parents objected  to  their
marriage.

87. He understood that her father had made a complaint  to  the  authorities
in Nepal.

88. He assumed that the complaint was against him being an  Indian  national
trying to get into Nepal.  He was afraid of the police and he knew  Indians
can be arrested in Nepal.  He had not taken legal advice about  what  might
happen.  He believed he was safe in the United Kingdom but did not think he
would be safe in India.

89. He said he did not see any photographs of the appellant with  her  uncle
or of the appellant with her father.  He had, he thought, seen  photographs
of her with her mother but had not submitted anything to the authorities in
the United Kingdom.  He speculated that he may have seen  something  on  an
old mobile phone but he did not know.

90. He had spoken briefly with his wife's first child but  his  wife  speaks
to the child every Saturday at his boarding school.  They had no  money  to
provide and he did not know who paid for the child.

91. He confirmed that he did not speak Nepalese.  He and his wife  spoke  in
English.

92. He said that he did not understand his father-in-law to  have  supported
his religious marriage to the appellant.

93. He did not know what had to be done to marry lawfully to show  that  the
earlier marriage had been ended by the death of the partner.   He  repeated
that when he married the appellant he did not know she was a widow.

94. He had no plans to return to India.

95. He does not wish to give his child Indian nationality.

96. This  is  a  case  where  the  expert  evidence  has  been  particularly
important because it sets the context in which the oral  evidence  must  be
assessed.

97. I have two reports from Dr David Seddon, one dated  11  April  2018  and
the other dated 3 September 2020.

98. Dr Seddon is now retired but was professor of sociology and politics  in
the University of East Anglia and  his  qualifications  include  holding  a
doctoral degree from the London School of Economics and  Political  Science
in social anthropology.

99. He lived in Nepal for two years in the  1970s  and  speaks  Nepali.   He
said that he has travelled widely through the country and made many  visits
there, staying for up to several months in different places  and  his  last
visit was at the end of December 2017 into January 2018.

100. He is well informed about the  Constitution  and  legal  framework  and
customs and traditions of Nepal and has provided many expert reports.

101. He understood his obligations to the court.

102. He had reviewed the documents that he had seen to help him prepare  his
report for the Tribunal.

103. His report began, appropriately, by setting out the background  to  the
claim.  Unsurprisingly this did not add anything  to  the  appellant's  own
evidence that I have summarised above and I see no point in summarising  it
again.

104. Dr Seddon  then  moved  on  to  consider  the  "documentary  and  other
evidence".

105.  Dr  Seddon's  analysis  of  the  documentary  evidence  is,  I   find,
particularly helpful.

106. He concludes (I do not consider this controversial) that the  appellant
is from a caste group known as the "Yadavs" who come predominantly from the
central and eastern plains of Nepal, including the Siraha district.   Their
caste is linked to the Chhetri group who are the second highest caste group
in Nepal.  Typically they are wealthy and powerful and many are politicians
and businesspeople.

107.  Marriage  between  different  caste  groups  takes  place  but  it  is
unacceptable to the vast majority of Nepalis.   Dr  Seddon  said  that  the
appellant's description of a conservative family concerned with matters  of
family honour  and  shame  are  "entirely  consistent  with  the  objective
information and my own detailed knowledge of the social dynamics in Nepal's
Terai region."

108. The documentary evidence supporting the claim included  photographs  of
the appellant's uncle engaged in political activities.  Dr Seddon said that
the uncle's name is  "extremely  common"  but  somebody  of  that  name  is
undoubtedly a prominent local politician in Siraha.

109. The appellant had claimed that her father and uncle  were  involved  in
violent party politics where kukhuris (the Nepali machete) were  drawn  and
produced documentary evidence of a clash of the kind  that  she  described.
Dr Seddon found  that  this  strand  of  evidence  tended  to  confirm  the
appellant's account.

110. He had seen a copy of the "application" made by the appellant's  father
to police informing him of the marriage and requesting that  the  appellant
and her husband be arrested in the event of his coming to Nepal.  Dr Seddon
was uncertain but, given what he knew about Nepalese society, he  found  it
"highly likely" that it was a genuine document  issued  after  a  complaint
from the appellant's father.

111. He accepted that a person  identified  as  an  aunt  of  the  appellant
served as a minister under a Nepali Congress Party government.

112. He saw no reason to doubt the authenticity of a document purporting  to
show that the appellant's husband should be expelled from the Nair  Brahmin
community because of the disgrace he brought upon himself and the community
by marrying the appellant.

113. He opined that the kind of conditions that the appellant would face  in
Kerala would make normal private life impossible.

114. Paragraph 5.2 of the conclusions it is clear and I set it out:

  "On the basis of all the evidence, taken in the round, it is  my  opinion
  that both [the appellant] and her husband would be at real risk  if  they
  were to return or be returned to Nepal, or to India, if  they  return  to
  their home areas, not only of social disapproval and ostracism  but  also
  of serious harm  of  disapproving  members  of  their  family  and  local
  community.  It would be extremely difficult, in my opinion  for  them  to
  live a normal private life, under the  circumstances,  either  in  Siraha
  (Nepal) or locally in Kerala (India)".

115. Dr Seddon found  the  document  indicating  police  involvement  to  be
genuine and that means the appellant's husband  faced  risk  of  arrest  on
return.

116. Significantly, at  paragraph  5.4,  he  doubted  that  the  appellant's
father's influence would extend outside the Siraha district.

117. Dealing with internal relocation within Nepal he again  suggested  that
social isolation would be unduly harsh.

118. He also indicated that  it  would  be  difficult  for  the  appellant's
husband to go with the appellant in the event of the appellant returning to
Nepal.  Neither he nor  any  children  could  be  naturalised  after  about
fifteen years.  The naturalisation of any children would  not  be  possible
until their Indian father had been naturalised.

119. Dr Seddon then  considered  internal  relocation  to  another  part  of
Nepal.  The appellant had said how her  family  had  hired  thugs  and  she
thought they would hire thugs to track her down in the event of her return.
 Because of  the  family's  political  involvement  Dr  Seddon  thought  it
"extremely difficult" to relocate within Nepal  without  being  caught  and
then harassed possibly to the point of persecution.  Registration with  the
authorities is required and he considered "it would not be  too  difficult"
for an influential and determined person to find them.

120. Dr Seddon produced a further report dated 3 September  2020  partly  in
response to my finding that there was an  error  of  law  in  the  decision
relating to this appellant.   He  reinforced  Professor  Aguilar's  opinion
which I consider below.

121. Essentially the report reinforces his earlier opinion but he  had  seen
new  evidence.   Dr  Seddon  was  shown  the  birth  certificate  for   the
appellant's first child.  He clearly found  it  a  credible  document  that
supported her claim at least about her first marriage and being widowed.

122. He repeated his view that it was doubtful that the  appellant's  father
had any influence outside Siraha and also repeated his view that it will be
difficult for the appellant to establish herself in  a  different  part  of
Nepal.

123. If the second husband  relocated  with  her  he  would  be  in  a  very
difficult position.  Indians generally are not liked in Nepal.

124. He also repeated his view it was reasonable and well-founded  to  think
that the appellant's family might hire thugs to track her  down  and  shame
her and punish her for shaming them.

125. He was aware of "honour killings" (if I may be permitted  a  convenient
but chillingly inappropriate phrase) of the kind the appellant feared here.
Detailed reports about such killings are rare but it is believed that  most
honour killings are undetected.

126. He concluded his report by  saying  he  did  not  consider  it  "highly
likely" that the appellant would be a victim of honour killing but  it  was
he suggested a real possibility that should not be discounted easily.

127. Dr Seddon did make clear that he accepts  the  appellant's  husband  is
Indian and of the Brahmin caste which is the highest caste in society.

128. Professor Mario Aguilar has produced an expert report  dated  23  April
2019.  Professor Aguilar identifies himself as the director of  the  Centre
for the Study of Religion and Politics at the University of St Andrews  and
has particular expertise in Hinduism.

129. He was asked to comment on the plausibility of the appellant's  account
in her supplementary witness statement.  He found it plausible that she was
forced into marriage at the age of 17 as she  claimed  and  confirmed  that
marriages are unions within families and certainly the political  alliances
forged by a marriage would be a consideration when arrangement were made.

130. It was plausible  and  consistent  with  his  understanding  of  social
values that the appellant did not know her first husband at  all  when  the
marriage was arranged or indeed even that she  was  getting  married  until
much of the arranging had been done.

131. Similarly he found it plausible the appellant was expected to cook  for
the family and look after her husband and that a woman who did not fall  in
line would be seen as  dishonourable.   The  fact  that  she  was  pregnant
indicated the completion of the marriage and she  could  not  be  separated
from her husband's family.  He  also  confirmed  the  astrological  problem
noted by the appellant would  be  a  significant  feature.   Again  it  was
plausible and consistent with his understanding of tradition  that  in  the
event of her husband's death another member of the extended family could be
found to take his place.

132. At paragraph 30 he said:

  "It makes absolute sense culturally  that  the  appellant  felt  enormous
  shame of having been married with a son who was not with her  and  having
  found a loving partner in Europe.  One cannot  speculate  on  sentiments,
  but it is plausible to say that no  other  Hindu  of  Nepali  would  have
  married her after finding out that she  is  a  Magalik  who  was  already
  married and has a child.   I  understand  that  the  appellant's  current
  husband is a Brahmin thus according to tradition  they  could  not  marry
  because they would be contravening MDH as mentioned in  paragraph  23  of
  this report."

133. In short he found the appellant account of treatment by her and  family
and by her in-laws "absolutely plausible".

134. It was  similarly  plausible  there  would  be  difficulties  obtaining
documents.

135. Of great interest is  the  professor's  opinion  on  the  risk  of  the
appellant being subjected to ill-treatment in  the  event  of  return.   He
explained that the appellant has not returned to look after her son  or  to
marry again.  He said at paragraph 37, I found somewhat chillingly,:

  "I am afraid that my opinion is that because she has been  involved  with
  an Indian Brahmin and they are married her late  husband's  family  would
  try to kill her following a practice that is common in  India,  Pakistan,
  and Nepal."

136. He then went on to discuss the risk of "honour killing". He  said  that
such killings had been part of life of the Hindu and other  communities  in
British  India  for  a  long  time.   They  do  occur  and  they  might  be
increasingly common.  I think that the syntax has gone slightly adrift  but
the sentiment at paragraph 40 is clear. He said of the appellant that:

  "She is at a very high risk of being beaten,  disfigured  with  acid,  or
  killed by her late husband's relatives because she has attempted  on  the
  family honour.  This risk would apply to her chosen husband.   This  risk
  would also apply to her current husband being an Indian Brahmin  who  has
  had a relationship with a Nepali Magalik."

137. He found there would be a real risk of her being subjected to  violence
on return.  She had not looked after her son and she had  not  returned  to
marry into her late husband's family.

138. He found plausible her explanation for not being able  to  get  medical
evidence confirming her attempted suicide.

139. He prepared an  addendum  to  the  report  dated  2 April  2020.   His
attention was drawn to paragraphs 36 and 37 in my decision that  there  was
an error of law and there I commented  that  Professor  Aguilar's  opinions
were not informed by his reading the interview record.  He has now read the
interview record and that has not changed his mind.

140. I have considered the appellant's bundle as a whole.

141. I had noted the supporting letters in  there  from  friends  but  these
simply served to show that there is  a  genuine  relationship  between  the
appellant and her husband which has never been doubted.

142. The appellant was interviewed about her asylum claim on 5 April 2017.

143. She began by saying she feared her family  in  Nepal  and  particularly
her father and her uncle.  Her uncle was a politician, the local mayor.

144. The appellant talked about her arranged marriage and  made  clear  that
she wanted no part of it.

145. She had studied in  the  United  Kingdom  and  then  met  the  man  she
married.

146. The appellant did not mention in  this  interview  that  she  had  been
married previously and had a child in Nepal.

147. I have read the record but I see no reason to make any further  comment
on it at this stage.

148. Ms Cunha made her submissions.  She relied on the refusal letter  which
is dated 20 September 2017 and which I outline below.

149. The letter begins, appropriately,  by  acknowledging  that  it  is  the
appellant's case that she would be unlawfully killed  upon  her  return  to
Nepal.  The letter asserts, without  explanation,  that  this  is  a  "non-
Convention reason" and it was not based on her membership of  a  particular
social group.

150. The respondent did not believe the appellant.

151. It is accepted that the appellant is a citizen of Nepal.

152. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was  at  risk  in  the
event of return to Nepal.

153. An explanation for this was given.  It was the  appellant's  case  that
her family were "traditional" and wanted to arrange a marriage for her  but
she was allowed to travel to the United Kingdom at a time when her  parents
were planning an arranged marriage. These two claims were considered to  be
inconsistent.

154. The appellant had now married an Indian national and she was asked  why
she would enter into such a relationship if it  would  cause  the  problems
that she alleged.  She claimed in her interview not to have  thought  about
the circumstances.

155. The respondent noted that the appellant made no effort to claim  asylum
in 2012 even though she said then that her father had  threatened  to  kill
her and she also claimed at that time to be  in  contact  with  her  mother
which the respondent thought inconsistent with her claim to  be  killed  in
the event of return.

156. The respondent acknowledged her claim  to  come  from  a  high  profile
politically active family but found no independent evidence to support that
claim and did not believe it.  The respondent did not  understand  why  she
named her husband if she thought it was going to be  problematic  and  this
was not explained.

157. The respondent acknowledged receipt of supporting documents  but  found
their provenance uncertain and was not impressed by them.

158. The respondent then reminded herself of Section 8  of  the  Asylum  and
Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and  said  the  Section
applied because  the  application  for  asylum  was  only  made  after  the
appellant had been refused an application to vary her leave to remain.  The
appellant was aware of the problems before making her application for leave
to remain and the respondent said that it damaged her  credibility  by  not
applying for asylum.

159. The respondent then purported to deal with  sufficiency  of  protection
but looked to country conditions in India  because  it  was  reasonable  to
expect the appellant to return there now she is married to an Indian.  I do
not follow this at all.  I do not know if the appellant would be  permitted
to enter India.  I suspect that she would but in what  circumstances  I  do
not know.  The  part  of  the  decision  that  deals  with  sufficiency  of
protection is, I find, entirely unhelpful.

160. The decision also suggests that the appellant  can  avoid  problems  by
internal relocation  but  again  the  respondent  is  considering  internal
relocation within India which is not a country of which the appellant is  a
national and I see no basis on which the Secretary of  State  could  return
her there unless she chose to go in which case I would not  be  considering
an appeal.

161. Other grounds were considered, particularly Article 8 of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights, but nothing is  said  that  I  consider  to  be
obvious and of limited value.

162. Ms Cunha then took me to the expert's report and addendum.

163. She began by considering Professor Aguilar's report.   Ms  Cunha  noted
the serious  and  very  high  risk  identified  by  Professor  Aguilar  but
submitted that the conclusion was based on a factual premise that she  said
had not been made out.

164. She then considered Dr Seddon's report.  She  pointed  out,  correctly,
that Dr Seddon was not able to find  any  clear  link  between  the  people
identified by the appellant as her relatives who were politically active in
Nepal and those people.  The only  common  factor  was  a  name  which  was
expressed to be common.  She pointed out  too  that  much  of  Mr  Seddon's
report was devoted to what would happen  in  the  event  of  the  appellant
returning with her husband but there was no evidence that he would do that.



165. The Application to District Police, complaint, she submitted,  referred
to somebody who was a resident of India coming to Nepal.  It is  not  clear
what or who was supposed to do anything as a result of that.

166. Ms Cunha submitted there was  no  evidence  that  effective  protection
would not be available or that internal relocation could not occur.

167. She was also critical  of  the  appellant  for  not  giving  her  child
nationality.  The child is not British and should have been registered with
the authorities in India and/or Nepal although it is not  clear  quite  how
that illuminates the decision I have to make except to the extent  that  it
suggests a cynical determination to find a way of remaining in  the  United
Kingdom.

168. Ms Norman relied on her written submissions but also  on  her  skeleton
argument which I consider below.  Ms Norman's skeleton argument is dated 12
September 2020.

169. Paragraph 4 sets out how the appellant puts  her  case.   According  to
the appellant she is a refugee under the terms of the 1951  Convention  and
the Qualification Directive.  The sole country of reference is Nepal  which
is the country of which she is a  national.   Internal  relocation  is  not
reasonable and removal would  breach  Article  2  and  3  of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights and would be disproportionate under Article 8 in
any event.

170. I consider first her contention that  the  appellant's  case,  if  made
out, comes within the scope of the Refugee Convention.  Ms Norman says  the
appellant is a member of a particular social group, namely "a woman who  is
married outside her caste and nationality" and that she  risks  persecution
as a result.  She submitted that "marriage outside caste  and  nationality"
is an identifiable characteristic existing independently of persecution and
is an immutable characteristic, the marriage having taken place  and  caste
being unchangeable.

171. I reflected on this and can really see no  objection  to  it.   If  the
appellant needs protection on her case then it is protection as a refugee.

172. Ms Norman makes the  point  that  it  is  the  respondent's  case  that
protection and internal flight can be found in India  and  that  is  not  a
relevant consideration.  I agree with her about that and,  although  it  is
still for the appellant to prove that she cannot relocate within  Nepal  or
look to the state for protection, the respondent has done  very  little  to
raise a counter argument  because  the  respondent  has  picked  the  wrong
country.

173. Ms Norman then addresses the appellant's credibility.  Much is said  in
her skeleton argument that criticises the Secretary  of  State's  approach.
She makes the point that the respondent's contention  that  a  family  that
would persecute the appellant for defying Conventions  about  marriage  and
particularly marrying outside her own caste and against the wishes  of  her
family would not be a family that educated its women is, at best  based  on
speculation.  Ms Norman pointed out that it was the appellant's  case  that
one of her relatives, an aunt, was  in  a  politically  powerful  position.
There was no justification for the contention on the part of the respondent
that  there  was  an   unbelievable   incompatibility   between   the   two
characteristics and certainly the expert's report ends to  support,  rather
than undermine her contention.

174. It is also right to acknowledge that the appellant claims to  have  had
some contact with her mother but to have not had contact for some time.  Ms
Norman says that it does not follow from that that the appellant is not  at
risk from her father.  She was critical of the tone of the interview and  I
note the comments made there but that is  not  something  that  assists  me
particularly.

175. The experts' reports are from respected sources.   Dr  Seddon  believes
that the birth certificate for the appellant's first  child  is  a  genuine
document which supports her claim to have been married and to  have  had  a
child.  The reports agree that it is plausible for her to claim  to  be  at
risk of violence from her family and that extends to the family finding her
and punishing her in the event of her return.

176. The report refers to "impunity" and "corruption" among the police  (see
paragraph 5.12 of Dr Seddon's report  of  11  April  2018)  and  Dr  Seddon
confirms that if the family have political "clout" as she claims,  internal
relocation would  be  difficult.   Registration  with  the  authorities  is
required and  Dr  Seddon  believes  a  person  of  influence  could  obtain
information that would lead to the appellant being traced.

177. The skeleton argument contended that the appellant's failure  to  claim
asylum on an earlier opportunity has to be set against her  clear  evidence
that she was the victim of bad advice or  fraudulent  advice  and  she  has
supported that with texts reassuring her that all was in  hand.   I  remind
myself of the relevant chronology.  The  appellant  claimed  asylum  on  22
March 2017.  She had been served with a form RED0001 as an overstayer about
ten days before on 12 March  2017.   She  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
November 2009 and her leave was extended until November 2014.  She remained
as an overstayer and on 16 February 2015 applied  on  "family  and  private
life" grounds.  She appealed  the  decision  and  her  appeal  rights  were
exhausted on 11 January 2016.  It is the appellant's  case  that  she  took
part in a religious marriage ceremony in December 2012 and  their  marriage
was "registered" in February 2013.  Certainly the correspondence appears to
be between the appellant and a legal advisor and can be described as having
an "optimistic tone".  Ms Norman argued  that  the  conduct  did  not  come
within the province of Section 8 at all.  I cannot  agree  with  her  about
that.  Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
etc.) Act 2004  prescribes  that  in  "Determining  whether  to  believe  a
statement made by or on behalf of the person who makes an asylum claim or a
human right claim, a deciding authority shall take account, as damaging  to
the  claimant's  credibility,  of  any  behaviour  to  which  this  Section
applies." and Section 8(5) informs me that the Section "applies to  failure
by the claimants to make an asylum claim or human rights claim before being
notified of an immigration decision, unless  the  claim  relies  wholly  on
matters arising after the notification."

178. The delay is discreditable because Parliament says that it is  but  how
discreditable is a matter  for  me  and  I  do  not  find  it  particularly
discreditable.  From the appellant's point of  view  she  was  pursuing  an
application that she expected to succeed.  I doubt if she was familiar with
the requirements of the Act and although I  must  treat  her  behaviour  as
discreditable I really cannot put much weight  on  that  as  a  reason  for
disbelieving her.

179. I consider now the  interview  and  asylum  claim.   In  her  screening
interview the appellant complained about being stressed and summarised  her
asylum claim in the following terms: "two reasons.  Married  to  an  Indian
guy - my family don't accept this - nor does his family, I am homeless,  my
family are high up in politics, they don't like Indians,  don't  understand
language."

180. The interview  took  place  on  5  April  2017  with  the  help  of  an
interpreter in the Nepali language.

181. She began by  saying  she  feared  her  family  and  only  her  family.
Particularly she feared her father  and  uncle.   She  explained  that  her
father and her uncle were politicians.  Her problems began since they found
out she was living with her husband.  Cohabitation began in June  2012  and
it was discovered in October 2012.

182. She explained how in October 2012 her  mother  telephoned  her  to  say
that the family had found a man for her to marry who she described as  "one
of the sons of the party leader" and she stalled and she had  to  tell  her
mother that she was living with her husband.

183. The interviewer expressed surprise that it was late to be  arranging  a
marriage when she was aged 29.   The  appellant  then  said  that  the  man
identified as a suitable husband was not related and  she  claimed  not  to
have met him.  The interviewing officer found some of the answers confusing
as the office said at question 23: "but you said this was going  on  before
you came to the UK?" and the appellant replied "yes it was to  a  different
person before".

184. The appellant said she did not want to get  married  to  people  linked
with politics.  She said  that  the  family  respected  her  choice  to  be
educated but was strict about marriage.

185. She was asked why she did not claim asylum in 2012 and replied  "I  had
leave at this point".

186. At question 36 the interviewer said: "I  don't  believe  you  did,  the
information I have here indicates your leave was curtailed  in  June  2012"
and the appellant replied:

  "I had leave until 2013 then the college closed down and then  I  started
  looking for another college.  I looked for the college during  that  time
  and applied for leave that expired in 2014 in November.  The  application
  I made was appealed and leave was granted until 2014, I  cannot  remember
  all the dates but I remember the leave was going to  expire  in  November
  2014.  Then we filed for Human Rights family life and private life."

187. She raised in  interview  her  dissatisfaction  with  her  former  (not
qualified) advisors.

188. She said that her father had threatened to kill  her  and  her  husband
and in answer to question 46, "Why did he make  that  threat?"she  replied,
"because before I came I told them I would marry the person  they  told  me
and I broke that promise.  My father and his friend had a promise  that  we
would marry and it is a big deal for them."

189. At the time of being interviewed she said she had had no  contact  with
her family for five months.  Her  mother  telephoned  because  she  is  her
mother and her mother tried to convince the appellant to  return.   It  was
suggested that contact with her mother was inconsistent with her  claim  to
fear death but she said that if she and her husband went to India  together
they would be killed and if she left her husband  behind  "then  I  am  not
alive because I am not living my life".

190. It was suggested that the appellant had entered into  the  marriage  so
she could stay in the United Kingdom.  She denied that.   She  said  "if  I
wanted to stay in the UK I would have gone for  a  British  citizen".   She
explained that hers was a love  match.   She  emphasised  that  inter-caste
marriages were not acceptable in Nepal.

191. The appellant said that because of her family's  political  connections
the police were in their pockets.  She  said  how  her  uncle  was  in  the
Nepalese Congress Party and she named her father and said how her uncle had
been in politics since she was 10 or 11 years old.

192. It was put to her  that  the  interviewing  officer  had  identified  a
person with that name but the details did not match. That did not  surprise
her. The appellant said that the person referring to was  from  "the  other
side of the country".

193. It was then suggested that if the interviewing office could  not  trace
the person online then that person could not be described as  high  profile
(question 68). The appellant denied telling lies. She said that  her  uncle
was a local mayor.

194. The appellant concluded the interview by repeating her claim  that  she
was sure she would be killed if she went to Nepal with her husband.

195. In her oral submissions Ms Norman  reminded  me,  correctly,  that  the
UNHCR guidelines require me  to  give  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  to  an
appellant on issues of credibility but also reminded  me,  correctly,  that
the key question was not the peripheral details of the claim but  the  core
claim, namely whether she was at risk of serious violence or worse  because
she had defied Convention  and  married  outside  her  caste.   The  expert
evidence supported the plausibility of that claim.

196. Ms Norman accepted at least by implication that  the  appellant's  late
disclosure of her son from a lately disclosed marriage was  a  questionable
element in her appeal  but  pointed  out  this  was  an  admission  against
interests.  The appellant did not have to say these things  and  mentioning
them at all was indicative of her telling the truth.  What it  did  not  do
was show that she was not at risk because of her marriage.

197. It was submitted that on analysis I would have to  conclude  that  the
appellant was substantially truthful.  She submitted there were  no  proper
reasons for undermining the Application  to  the  District  Police.  Family
lineage is important and the evidence, including the expert report, is that
she could be found.

198. I have had considerable difficulty in drawing together all the  strings
in this case.  There are elements of the evidence which are  unsatisfactory
and there are  elements  of  the  evidence  which  I  find  compelling.   I
appreciate of course it is my task to decide if I am satisfied  that  there
is a reasonable likelihood of the appellant risking  persecution  or  other
serious ill-treatment in the event of her return.  Whilst  I  think  it  is
apparent from the remarks made above I am not impressed by the respondent's
contention that her credibility is destroyed by her late asylum  claim.   I
must regard the late claim as a negative  factor  because  parliament  says
that I must but I bear in mind that at the time of her marriage  which  was
the incident on her events that meant she could not go back and do  as  the
parents wished, she was lawfully in the United Kingdom and she  was  making
subsequent attempts to regularise her position.  I give significant  weight
to her claim that she was  the  victim  of  bad  advice  because  there  is
paperwork which gives substance to that and it was a claim she made  at  an
early stage and I do not regard her  credibility  as  more  than  minimally
damaged by the late claim.

199. I find her lack of candour with the  interviewing  officer  concerning.
The appellant is a woman who claims, and  has  produced  a  credible  birth
certificate to support it, that she is a widow and the mother of a child in
Nepal who she contacts frequently.  There is nothing  at  all  unbelievable
about this part of the claim, and neither is there anything from a  western
perspective that is in the least bit shameful although leaving the child in
the care of another might perhaps raise a  few  question  marks  about  her
commitment as a mother.  It is an extraordinary thing not to mention during
the course of an interview and an astonishing thing not to mention  to  her
husband in waiting and to keep secret until after the marriage, yet this is
what she says happened.  I do not understand it.  I do not understand  why,
if this is the truth, she should be reticent about it or why if it  is  not
the truth she should claim that it is.  It is an element of her case  which
seems to do it no assistance whether true or untrue but her failure  to  be
frank does set up a concern that she is an unreliable historian.

200. I remind myself of Dr Seddon's second report at paragraph 7.3 where  he
said:

  "It is my opinion, given my knowledge of Nepali society  and  the  values
  and beliefs held by high caste Hindus in particular, that her explanation
  for this - namely that she was deeply embarrassed and ashamed,  and  also
  frightened of the implications for  her  relationship  with  her  current
  husband were he to know about her previous marriage, pregnancy and  child
  - is plausible."

201. I must give weight to that.  Dr Seddon's evidence is  there  to  do  to
assist me in understanding a different  culture  from  his  perspective  of
informed academic analysis over many years.  I  have  not  been  given  any
reason to discount that evidence and the fact it does not fit  in  with  my
expectations based  on  my  experience  of  life  is  not  very  important.
Professor Aguilar makes the same comment and I make the  same  observation.
Decisions are made by judges,  not  by  experts  but  expert  opinions  are
entitled to respect and there was nothing before me that undermines  either
their general reputation or their opinion on  this  particular  point.   It
follows therefore that I must overcome my own feelings and bear in mind the
inherent plausibility of her great reluctance to be frank about her earlier
life experiences.

202. This comment also applies to the otherwise  curious  feature  that  she
failed to mention not only a previous marriage but that she had  previously
been married to the brother of the person it  was  now  intended  that  she
should marry.  It is not in any way  to  her  advantage  to  make  up  this
relationship and to rely on it or as far as I can  see  to  omit  it  which
risks creating a suspicion of  dishonesty.   For  similar  reasons  I  must
discount any unease I have about her  lack  of  candour  about  the  chosen
husband.

203. That she was expected to marry her late husband's brother is,  I  find,
consistent with my expectations and much more importantly  consistent  with
the expert's report.  That she found the first  marriage  very  unhappy  is
easy to believe.  She is a young woman with the  ability  to  benefit  from
education, and who wanted to be in the United Kingdom. She had no  interest
in being the family skivvy which I find is what was expected of her.

204. Contrary to what she said she did know something  about  her  husband's
brother and did not like what she had seen.  It makes sense to me that  she
would be appalled at the idea of being expected to marry him.  Not only was
an arranged marriage against her inclinations  (although  no  doubt  wholly
consistent with her upbringing) it was an arranged marriage to someone  she
found repugnant and I find that part of her story credible.

205. I cannot agree with the Secretary of State that allowing the  appellant
to travel to the United Kingdom to study is somehow inconsistent  with  the
family values requiring obedience to marital plans.  I see  no  reason  why
the family's expectations should be liberal in both regards.   I  found  Ms
Norman's observations that the politically active and therefore independent
aunt was clearly part of the family helpful. The family  are  "liberal"  in
some ways. It does not follow that they are liberal in all ways.

206. The independent evidence from the internet that the appellant's  family
is politically active, rather  than  simply  being  evidence  of  political
activity by people with appropriate names is not compelling but it does not
have  to  be.   Professor  Seddon  indicated  that  political  activity  is
associated with the appellant's caste and she is not  suggesting  that  her
father or uncle were especially high profile at a national level.  It would
have been better if she could have provided some photographic evidence that
linked the photographs said to be of her uncle and father to  her  but  she
did not and that is a deficiency in the case.  I find the story  inherently
plausible and I decided to believe her claim on that point.   I  appreciate
that the Secretary of State does not.  I  am  not  allowed  the  luxury  of
indecision on  this  point  and  I  have  decided  to  resolve  it  in  the
appellant's favour.

207. Once  that  is  established,  then,  by  marrying  anyone  without  her
parents' permission, the appellant has shamed her family. Just how  hostile
they would be to such an arrangement is not easy to evaluate.   Again  from
my perspective, the idea of a man's daughter behaving  in  a  way  that  so
offended his family values and shamed him in front of others  and  outraged
him that he would want to do her really serious harm or even  kill  her  is
unfathomable but the risk is not from me.  I remind myself of paragraph 4.2
of  Professor  Seddon's  report,  noted  above  (paragraph  106)  that  the
appellant's family is conservative and concerned about  matters  of  family
honour and shame is entirely consistent with his knowledge of the area.

208. There is a footnote to the report suggesting that Professor Seddon  has
particular knowledge of the mores of that area.

209. I remind myself of Professor Aguilar's comments at paragraph  37  where
he says:

  "Indeed, there is a real risk that the first appellant is being subjected
  to violence on return, particularly as she has not returned to look after
  her son, and to marry again.   This  time  though,  I'm  afraid  that  my
  opinion is that because she has been involved with an Indian Brahmin  and
  they had married her late husband's family will try to kill her following
  a practice that is common in India, Pakistan and Nepal."

210. I remind myself too that though  I  have  resolved  my  doubts  on  the
appellant's integrity in her favour the point here, that  she  is  at  risk
because she has married someone of a different caste, is not  dependent  on
those findings but on the undisputed fact of the marriage and the castes of
the appellant and her husband.

211. I have read the  background  material  relating  to  so  called  honour
killing and it introduces me  to  the  I  find  less  objectionable  phrase
"customary killing" but other than assuring me that such things do happen I
did not find them particularly helpful.   The  material  did  not  help  me
assess the degree of risk that this appellant faces.

212. Overall I am satisfied that  the  appellant  has  married  outside  her
caste and contrary to tradition and in so doing has thwarted the  plans  of
her family to marry her to a man who was the brother of her  first  husband
and which marriage would be socially advantageous for her immediate family.
 I am also satisfied that by putting herself in a position where she cannot
marry him she has shamed her family and that, it is reasonably likely, will
provoke a degree of outrage far greater than would be assumed by  a  person
living in the west with European values.  Death is a real risk  or  a  less
drastic but exceedingly serious  alternative  punishment  as  suggested  by
Professor Aguilar such as attacking her with acid is a  real  risk  if  she
goes where her family can find her.

213. The appellant would not have to go where her family could find her  but
I note Professor Seddon's observations over his two reports that whilst the
family probably do not have the power to have influence  throughout  Nepal,
they do have the means to find  her.   This  is  speculation  on  Professor
Seddon's part but there is a centralised record keeping system and Nepal is
a society where there is much corruption and the  family  have  wealth  and
influence.

214. Further it would be extremely difficult for the appellant to  establish
herself in Nepal.  I do not know how she would manage on  her  own  without
family support which she clearly would  not  want  and  her  husband  as  a
foreigner from the wrong caste would be a liability, rather than an  asset.
It is plain that some Nepali women do marry  Hindu  men  because  there  is
evidence in the papers about how difficult the men  find  it  to  attain  a
naturalised status in Nepal but this appellant would be  returning  without
support and with powerful enemies powerful enough  to  flush  her  out.  It
would, I am satisfied, be unreasonable to expect her to  avoid  persecution
by enduring such hardship.

215. This case is not without its difficulties but I find, applying the  low
standard of proof that I am required to apply, the appellant has  made  out
her case.  She would be at risk in Nepal of  severe  ill-treatment  because
she is what she is and it would be persecution for a Convention reason.   I
find that she is a refugee and I allow her appeal.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 May 2021                    |
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA 09807 2017
                                                               PA 12258 2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2019                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

|                        |P Y                     |First Appellant         |
|                        |K S                     |Second Appellant        |


                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION in force)
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms J Norman, Counsel, instructed by Sterling & Law
                    Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       Appellants or either of them. Breach of this order can  be  punished
       as a contempt of court. I make this order because the Appellants are
       asylum seekers and are entitled to anonymity.

    2. There are two appellants  here.   The  first  Appellant,  PY,  is  a
       citizen of Nepal.  She  was  born  in  December  1982.   The  second
       Appellant, KS, is a citizen of India.  He was born in May 1985.  The
       parties married in a civil ceremony on 15  February  2013  and  this
       gave legal effect to a religious ceremony that had taken place on 14
       December 2012.

    3. They appeal against the  Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal promulgated on 3 June 2019 dismissing their appeal  against
       the decision of the Secretary of State made, in  each  case,  on  20
       September  2017  refusing  their  application  for   asylum   and/or
       humanitarian protection.  They appealed the decision on the  grounds
       that they were refugees and entitled to international protection and
       also that removing them would  contravene  their  rights  under  the
       European Convention on Human Rights,  particularly  Article  8.   In
       each case the appeals were dismissed on all grounds.   Although  the
       Appellants appeal a joint decision of the Secretary of State  which,
       appropriately, led to joint hearings in the First-tier Tribunal  and
       now the Upper Tribunal their cases  are  separate  and  have  to  be
       considered separately.

    4. The thrust of the appeals was particularly well  summarised  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge where she said at paragraph 3:

  "Both appellants claim asylum on the basis that their respective families
  have rejected their marriage and that they will be at risk on  return  to
  their home countries.  The first appellant  claimed  that  she  had  been
  threatened by her family because she married  an  Indian  national.   She
  claimed that her family are powerful and  wanted  her  to  marry  someone
  else.  She stated that they are politically influential and will be  able
  to find her even if she moves to India  with  her  husband.   The  second
  appellant claimed that his family disapprove of his marriage to the first
  appellant because he is Brahmin and that he will be at  risk  because  he
  married outside his caste.  He also fears that he will be killed  by  the
  appellant's family who have influence in India because of their political
  connections."

    5. I begin with the case of the second Appellant because  this,  in  my
       judgment, is by far the most straightforward.

    6. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  the  second  Appellant
       entered the United Kingdom with permission as a student in May 2010.
        His leave was extended in different capacities until 18 April 2016.

    7. On 25 November 2014 he applied for leave to remain on  "private  and
       family  life"  grounds  as  a  dependant  of  his  wife,  the  first
       Appellant.  That application was refused on 16 February 2015 and  an
       appeal dismissed on 17 December 2015.  On  7  April  2015,  that  is
       before the outstanding appeal was dismissed, he applied for leave to
       remain as a general migrant and the application was refused in  July
       2015.

    8. On 12 March 2017 he was served with a form  identifying  him  as  an
       overstayer and liable to detention.  Shortly afterwards on 16  March
       2017 he was served with removal directions for  India.   He  claimed
       asylum on 27 March 2017.

    9. The Judge summarised the Secretary of State's  reasons  for  refusal
       and the substance of the appeal before her.  It appeared to  be  the
       Appellants' case that the decisions leading to their  removal  would
       interfere with their private  and  family  lives  disproportionately
       because they would be removed to different countries.  The Judge was
       not satisfied that she had been told the truth.   She  gave  reasons
       for her findings, which are criticised in the grounds, and dismissed
       both appeals.

   10. The  Judge  also  had  regard  for  expert  evidence  and  again  is
       criticised for the way she considered it.

   11. The Judge's findings on the "Article 8"  claim  are  clear  and  are
       found mainly at paragraph 50 of the Decision  and  Reasons.   I  set
       them out below:

  "Ms Norman submitted that any interference with their  Article  8  rights
  will be disproportionate and that they would be living either in Nepal or
  in India without family support.  I find that  the  appellants  would  be
  able to live in Nepal where they could seek employment and carve  out  an
  independent life for themselves.  Alternatively they could live in India;
  the first appellant would be able to obtain a spouse visa  to  live  with
  her Indian husband in India.  Both appellants  are  well  educated.   The
  second appellant gave evidence that he has a Masters Degree in marketing,
  innovation  and  engineering.   I  find  that  they  can  utilise   their
  qualifications and experience and settle in India.  If they do  not  want
  to live in Kerala they could live in another part of India".

   12. At paragraph 52 the Judge said:

  "I find that  both  appellants  were  well  aware  that  if  they  feared
  returning to their countries of origin, they needed to claim  asylum.   I
  take  into  account  their  level  of  education.   I  find  that   their
  credibility is damaged under Section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
  (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 because they did not claim asylum
  until they were faced with removal.  The first appellant  claimed  asylum
  on 22 March 2017 when her application for leave to remain was refused  on
  16 February 2016.  The second appellant claimed asylum only when  he  was
  served with removal directions on 16 March 2017.  His claim for asylum is
  dated 27 March 2017.  In conclusion, I find that  any  interference  with
  the appellants' Article 8 rights, will be proportionate.  I do  not  find
  that the interference will result in unjustifiably harsh consequences."

   13. There are six grounds of appeal drawn by Ms Norman.  As far as I can
       ascertain only ground 4  relates  to  the  second  Appellant.   This
       ground criticises the Judge for finding that the credibility of  the
       "Appellants'" (plural) was damaged because they did not claim asylum
       until they were faced with removal.  The  ground  asserts  that  the
       details  of  the  claim  were  first  set  out  in  a  human  rights
       application in November 2014 and so the substance of the  claim  was
       known to the Secretary of State before any immigration decision  was
       made.

   14. The grounds then draw attention to the terms of Section 8(5) of  the
       2004 Act:

  "This Section also applies to failure by the claimant to make  an  asylum
  claim or human rights claim  before  being  notified  of  an  immigration
  decision, unless the claim relies wholly on  matters  arising  after  the
  notification."

   15. The ground asserts that the claim  could  be  framed  either  as  an
       asylum or as a human rights claim and as the human rights claim  was
       raised before the immigration decision was made  Section  8  has  no
       effect.

   16. Ground 6 mentions the second Appellant but only in  the  context  of
       criticising the Judge for not making a finding on the claim that  he
       would be arrested and mistreated by the police in the event  of  his
       arrival in Nepal.  That is not material. There is no question of the
       second Appellant being removed to Nepal  but  to  India.  The  Judge
       found that the second Appellant could live safely in India  and  the
       first Appellant could live there with him without difficulty if that
       is what she wished to do.

   17. The grounds do not criticise the First-tier Tribunal's finding  that
       the second Appellant had nothing to fear in India.  The evidence  to
       support a conclusion that he would face substantial difficulties  in
       India, with or without the first Appellant, was scant.  India  is  a
       large and diverse country.  There was nothing to give weight to  the
       expressed fear that the first Appellant's family would  be  able  to
       create trouble for the second Appellant in India  if  that  is  what
       they chose to do or that they  could  not  find  somewhere  to  live
       together without risking persecution or  other  really  serious  ill
       treatment.

   18. I appreciate that the  grounds  do  criticise  the  general  adverse
       credibility finding but that criticism  is,  I  find,  misconceived.
       Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
       etc.) Act 2004 sets  out  circumstances  in  which  Parliament  says
       conduct is discreditable.  It is a difficult section.  Discreditable
       conduct is discreditable without the  authority  of  Parliament  and
       conduct  which  appears  to  be  discreditable  is  not  necessarily
       discreditable or a reason  to  dismiss  a  protection  claim  merely
       because  an  Act  of   Parliament   identifies   such   conduct   as
       discreditable. This is not to disrespect  Parliament.   The  matters
       set out in Section 8 are convenient hooks on which to  hang  adverse
       credibility points and because they  are  recognised  by  Parliament
       there is rarely any need to give any expansion or  consideration  or
       explanation to justify an adverse credibility finding but the  point
       is not that an Act Parliament makes something discreditable but that
       something is discreditable and Section 8 makes it easy  to  identify
       and explain.  The  Judge's  point  at  paragraph  52  was  that  the
       Appellants (this applies to both of them) are well  educated  people
       who did not claim asylum until faced with removal.  In the  case  of
       the second Appellant  the  asylum  claim  followed  the  service  of
       removal directions on 16 March 2017 and deferred until 23 March 2017
       and the asylum claim followed on 27 March 2017.  The Judge's  clear
       point is that the Appellants could have claimed  asylum  earlier  if
       they were in need of protection and the delay is discreditable.  The
       Judge was  entitled  to  give  weight  to  that  point  without  any
       reference to Section 8.

   19. Counsel's grounds argue that the Section has  been  misapplied.   Ms
       Norman argued that it applies where there has  been  a  failure  "to
       make an asylum claim or human rights claim"  and  the  human  rights
       claim had been made.  In the case of the second Appellant the timing
       of the asylum claim is something that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
       consider and, given the general weakness of the  second  Appellant's
       claim, the Judge was entitled to give  considerable  weight  to  the
       claim being made when it was and not on an earlier occasion.

   20. Further I do not accept Counsel's contention that Section 8(5)  does
       not apply.  It applies where a person makes an  asylum  claim  or  a
       human rights claim.  Even if a human rights claim had been made  the
       asylum claim had not and it could have been because it was not based
       on fresh facts.  The Act applied and the Judge was entitled  to  use
       it as a convenient shorthand for explaining  her  finding  that  the
       second Appellant was not believable.

   21. There is no error of law in the decision in the case of  the  second
       Appellant.

   22. It does not follow that the  decision  in  the  case  of  the  first
       Appellant is sound and I turn to that now.

   23. I consider now the grounds as  far  as  they  relate  to  the  first
       Appellant.

   24. Ground 1 complains that the Judge has made findings  without  giving
       proper reasons.  Criticism is targeted at paragraphs 27 to 29 of the
       Decision and Reasons.  It is a feature of the first Appellant's case
       that she has been married, or at least in a relationship regarded as
       marriage (it does not seem to be  officially  recognised  in  Nepal)
       before she started her relationship with the second Appellant.  That
       relationship was unhappy and her former partner since did.  There is
       a child of that relationship who has now achieved, or is  close  to,
       his majority.

   25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found it significant  that  the  first
       Appellant  never  mentioned  in  her  screening  interview  or   her
       substantive asylum interview that she had  been  married  previously
       and had a son from that marriage.

   26. Screening interviews must always be reviewed with considerable  care
       because their function is to identify the gist case so that  it  can
       be categorised, rather than to distil all the information  on  which
       an applicant seeks to rely.  However the record shows that the first
       Appellant was asked directly at question 1.19 to confirm details  of
       any  spouse  or  partner  or  children  "not  included   on   asylum
       application".  That may have prompted the  first  Appellant  to  say
       that she had had a partner who had now died  and  had  a  child  who
       lived in Nepal but she did not.

   27. I  have  also  considered  the  Asylum  Interview  Record.   Perhaps
       surprisingly the standard rubric does not ask someone if  they  have
       been married more than once or about their children.  At question 27
       the first Appellant was asked: "Why weren't you married  off  before
       you came to the UK?".  She replied: "I was not interested in getting
       married to people linked with politics at all.  I told them I am not
       interested in marriage and I want to study first, get qualified  and
       then think about it."

   28. I note  too  that  earlier  questions  deal  with  the  interviewing
       officer's professed surprise that the first Appellant had  not  been
       married in Nepal but her answers did not indicate that she had  been
       married.

   29. The first Appellant was asked at question 35 why she did  not  claim
       asylum in 2012.  Her answer was that she had leave  at  that  point.
       The interviewing officer thought that that was wrong but  the  first
       Appellant persisted that she had leave and it  expired  in  November
       2014 and she made an in-time application (she  thought)  on  private
       and family life  grounds.   She  indicated  that  the  human  rights
       application was based on the husband and her not being  accepted  in
       Nepal.

   30. She then explained that she later told her parents that  she  had  a
       partner  in  the  United  Kingdom   and   how   that   news   caused
       consternation.  She said that her father threatened her  because  he
       had been shamed because a match he had planned  for  her  could  not
       happen.

   31. The first Appellant then explained how she had an uncle who was in a
       prominent position in politics.  The interviewing officer said  that
       he had not been able to find that relative at all  on  an  "internet
       search" and asked her to comment on the suggestion  that  the  uncle
       was not sufficiently important to worry about if  he  could  not  be
       found on the world wide web.  The first Appellant replied "five days
       isn't  enough"  meaning  it  was  not  enough  to  provide   further
       information.  The first Appellant  then  referred  to  evidence  she
       wanted to get in the form of the police report that  her  uncle  and
       father had submitted.  She insisted that she and her  husband  would
       be killed in Nepal.  Marriage in different  castes  was  a  shocking
       thing.

   32. The Judge was clearly entitled to find that  these  questions  would
       have prompted a forthright person  to  have  mentioned  the  earlier
       marriage. Taken at face  value  the  questioning  and  tone  of  the
       interview did encourage the first Appellant to say that she had  had
       an earlier relationship and a child and  the  failure  to  do  that,
       without more, clearly supports an adverse credibility finding.   The
       grounds contend that the adverse finding is unlawful  because  there
       was expert evidence that a previous relationship and a child of  the
       relationship would be a matter of shame for the first Appellant  and
       the Judge did not deal with the evidence that  the  first  Appellant
       would find it very difficult to admit to what  she  later  said  had
       happened.

   33. The Judge clearly understood the first Appellant's claim that it was
       shameful to mention the earlier relationship in  Nepal.   The  Judge
       records at paragraph  15  that  the  first  Appellant  "said  it  is
       culturally taboo to say that she was previously married  and  has  a
       child from another husband.  She said that she never mentioned  that
       to anyone."  Thus it is beyond argument that  the  Judge  understood
       the first Appellant's point.

   34. The Judge also noted at paragraph 37 of  her  Decision  and  Reasons
       Professor Aguilar's report where he said at paragraph 30:

  "It makes absolute sense culturally that  the  appellant  feels  enormous
  shame of having been married with a son who was not with her  and  having
  found a loving partner in Europe.  One cannot speculate on sentiments but
  it is plausible to say that no other Hindu or Nepali would  have  married
  her after finding out that she is a Magalik who was already  married  and
  has a child."

   35. At paragraph 38  the  Judge  suggests  that  the  reason  the  first
       Appellant did not mention at an early opportunity her earlier family
       is that it would be  understood  that  it  disadvantaged  her  as  a
       marriage partner to be widowed with a child.   The  Judge  suggested
       that far from being angry the first  Appellant's  parents  would  be
       pleased that she had found a partner and thereby relieving them from
       the difficult task of finding one suitable for her.  The Judge  also
       suggested that the family were not strict  in  Nepalian  traditional
       values.  If  they  were  they  would  not  have  allowed  the  first
       Appellant to have left her child in the care of the former husband's
       family while she went to study in the United Kingdom.

   36. Professor Aguilar  listed  the  matters  that  he  was  expected  to
       consider as part of  his  instructions.   He  refers  to  the  first
       Appellant's witness statement and her  husband's  witness  statement
       and their respective supplementary statements.  He does not refer to
       the interview record.  His observations about the first  Appellant's
       reluctance to disclose her former marital status is not informed  by
       the interview record and the context which might be thought to  have
       prompted a  truthful  person  to  have  overcome  embarrassment  and
       cultural taboos for the sake of her  personal  safety  and  to  have
       explained that she had been married previously.

   37. There is theoretical merit in the ground complaining that the  Judge
       did not  give  a  proper  reason  for  discounting  the  explanation
       suggested by Professor Aguilar and that  criticism  has  to  be  set
       against the background and the  facts.   There  was  a  full  asylum
       interview where it is quite clear to me a person who was telling the
       truth (which is more than just not telling lies) would  be  expected
       to have stated that she had indeed been married  before  and  had  a
       child.   Professor  Aguilar's  comments  are  not  informed  by  the
       interview record.  The criticism has  no  practical  merit.   It  is
       quite apparent that the Judge considered the evidence as a whole and
       can be excused for not giving a better  explanation  because  it  is
       obvious that Professor Aguilar was not  informed  properly  when  he
       expressed the opinion that he did.

   38. Ground 2 complains that the Judge had  given  weight  to  immaterial
       considerations.  At paragraph 29 the Judge does indeed  say  of  the
       first Appellant that:

  "I find that she attempted to hide the fact that she had been  previously
  married with a  son  and  as  a  widow  was  free  to  marry  the  second
  appellant."

   39. However, as the grounds correctly state, it had never been the first
       Appellant's case that she was not free to marry.  It  was  her  case
       that her chosen partner would be wholly unacceptable to her  family.



   40. I can make no sense of the finding that the first Appellant hid  the
       fact that she was free to marry the  second  Appellant  but  nothing
       turns on this finding. What the Judge found significant is that  she
       had attempted to hide the fact that she had previously been  married
       with a son.  The Judge went on to say that the first  Appellant  had
       said that she feared her  own  family  and  her  deceased  husband's
       family and found it significant that she had never mentioned a  fear
       of her deceased husband's family in the asylum interview. The  Judge
       was entitled to find that a woman genuinely frightened for her  life
       would have mentioned these things.

   41. Nevertheless the grounds are right when they say that the  issue  of
       the previous marriage does not affect the core  claim,  namely  that
       the first Appellant fears her parents' action if she is returned  to
       Nepal and she is not free to marry the person that  her  father  has
       chosen for her but with a husband from a  different  country  and  a
       different caste.

   42. The grounds say that the difference between a  "district  secretary"
       and a "Home Secretary" for the Congress Party is  trivial  and  does
       not go to the core of the claim.  It certainly does not  go  to  the
       core of the claim but it is  for  the  Judge  to  decide  if  it  is
       trivial.  The Judge was entitled to give weight to an  inconsistency
       in the description of an officer when it was the  first  Appellant's
       case that her uncle was politically active in an important way.

   43. The third ground deals with the  expert  evidence.   I  have  looked
       particularly carefully at Mr David Seddon's concern that  the  first
       Appellant's family might instruct thugs and would be expected to  do
       that to intimidate or even kill her.  The Judge is wrong to say that
       the expert took the claim at face value.  Mr Seddon was  careful  to
       refer to background material showing that criminal gangs operate  in
       eastern  Nepal,  including  the  Sirha  District  where  the   first
       Appellant originates and the plausibility of the  claim  was  not  a
       result of accepting at face value her assertions  but  reading  them
       against the background material.  The grounds contend correctly that
       the first Appellant's evidence is  that  her  family  supported  her
       before she met  and  married  the  second  Appellant  and  that  was
       something that she  expected  to  be  so  disturbing  she  was  very
       reluctant to tell her family about it.  The fact the first Appellant
       had previously had support from her family does not mean  that  they
       would continue to support her now that she is married.

   44. I have already considered ground 4.

   45. Ground 5 criticises the Judge for failing to  resolve  conflicts  on
       material matters and failure to take account of the expert report. I
       see merit  in  this  claim.   As  the  grounds  point  out,  it  was
       consistently the first Appellant's case  that  she  had  been  badly
       treated by her first  husband  who  was  an  alcoholic.   I  do  not
       understand why the Judge was able to conclude that there would be no
       threat from that family in the future except that analysis seemed to
       fit with her view that she had  formed  of  the  Appellant's  family
       circumstances in Nepal.  The Judge has not  dealt  with  the  expert
       evidence about this.

   46. Ground 6 complains there is a failure to make  a  relevant  finding.
       The point is that the  Judge  accepted  (I  think)  that  the  first
       Appellant's father had served a notice with the police  which  could
       have the effect of creating difficulties  for  the  first  Appellant
       and/or the second Appellant in the event of their  entry  to  Nepal.
       The Judge decided that this was done cynically to bolster the claim.
        I do not understand why the Judge preferred that explanation to the
       one advanced by the first Appellant, namely that it was done because
       of the parents wish to do her harm.

   47. The Judge has not dealt adequately with  the  expert  evidence  that
       adds weight to the credibility of the claim.

   48. I am far from  saying  that  the  first  Appellant  is  entitled  to
       international  protection  but  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge's
       decision does not deal adequately with the evidence before her and I
       set aside her decision insofar as it relates to the first Appellant.

   49. Further I find no findings can be preserved as everything should  be
       considered in the light  of  a  proper  examination  of  the  expert
       evidence.

   50. Findings regarding the second Appellant are sound and I dismiss  the
       appeal against the decision to dismiss the appeal of the second.

   51. I allow the appeal in the case of the first  Appellant  and  I  have
       decided that it is appropriate for this to  be  dealt  with  in  the
       Upper Tribunal probably before me.  I  give  no  further  directions
       concerning the admission of evidence.  If  either  party  wishes  to
       adduce evidence not already before the Tribunal then  they  must  do
       that promptly because they may find that the case  is  listed  quite
       soon.  In any event an application in accordance with the Rules will
       have to be made.

Notice of Decision

   52. In the case of the first Appellant, the First-tier Tribunal erred in
       law. I allow the appeal to the extent that I set aside the  decision
       and direct that the appeal be heard again in the Upper Tribunal.

   53. In the case of the second Appellant, I dismiss the appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 January 2020                |

