
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09579/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th May 2021                     |On 2nd September 2021                |
|Face-to-Face Hearing                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                  Mr I J O
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Maguire Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a national of Iraq and of Kurdish ethnicity born on 24th
August 1988, appeals against the decision of the respondent made on 27th
September 2017 to refuse his asylum, humanitarian protection and human
rights claims.

The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A M S Green on
26th February 2018 and was dismissed on 14th March 2018.  Permission to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 23rd August 2018 on the basis
that the judge erred in failing to provide sufficient reasons for finding
the appellant's account not credible.  On 19th February 2019 a decision by
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman found no material error of law and maintained
the decision.

An application for permission to appeal to the Court of Session was made.

On 18th March 2020 The Honourable Mr Justice Lane, in a joint decision and
in accordance with the Interlocutor of the Inner House, found an error of
law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 14th March 2018 owing
to inadequate reasoning and set it aside.  Undated directions were issued
that no oral evidence would be called and that the matter would be listed
for a remote hearing.  On 3rd December 2020 further directions were issued
that an interpreter should be made available because the Home Office
indicated a request to cross-examine the appellant.  The matter was
adjourned and set down for hearing.  That hearing was adjourned on the
basis that no interpreter was in attendance and the matter was resumed
before me on 20th May 2021.

Immigration History

The appellant and his wife arrived in the UK on 14th March 2017 and the
appellant claimed asylum on the same date.  On 14th March 2017 he was
issued with an IS.151A notice of liability for removal owing to illegal
entry: clandestine.

The Appellant's Claim under the Refugee Convention

The appellant claims in his appeal under Section 82(1) of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") that a return to home
territory would be a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the
1951 United Nations' Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the
later Protocol ("the Refugee Convention").  In determining this appeal I
have paid due attention to Section 85 of the 2002 Act and in so doing have
taken into account all avenues of appeal open to the appellant.

It is for an appellant to show that he or she is a refugee.  By Article
1A(2) of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person who is out of the
country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a well-founded fear of
persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality or membership of a
particular social group or political opinion, is unable or unwilling to
avail him or herself of the protection of the country of origin.

The degree of likelihood of persecution needed to establish an entitlement
to asylum is decided on a basis lower than the civil standard of the
balance of probabilities.  This was expressed as a "reasonable chance", "a
serious possibility" or "substantial grounds for thinking" in the various
authorities.  That basis of probability not only applies to the history of
the matter and to the situation at the date of decision, but also to the
question of persecution in the future if the appellant were to be returned.

On 9th October 2006 the Refugee or Person in Need of International
Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 ("the Qualifying Regulations")
came into force and some consequential changes in the Immigration Rules
were inserted after paragraph 339 of the existing Rules.  Under the
Qualifying Regulations a person is to be regarded as a refugee if they fall
within the definition set out in Article 1A of the Refugee Convention (see
above) and are not excluded by Articles 1D, 1E or 1F of the Refugee
Convention (Regulation 7 of the Qualifying Regulations).

The Appellant's Claim under the Humanitarian Protection

The Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules provide for a grant of
humanitarian protection in circumstances where a person does not qualify as
a refugee but can show substantial grounds for believing that they would,
if returned to their country of return, face a real risk of suffering
serious harm.  The applicant must be unable or owing to such risk unwilling
to avail himself of the protection of that country.

Appeal under the Human Rights Convention

This appeal is also brought under the 2002 Act because the appellant
alleges that the respondent has in making his decision acted in breach of
the appellant's human rights.  The appellant has in particular relied upon
Articles 2 (Right to Life), 3 (Prohibition of Torture) and 8 (Right to
Respect for Private and Family Life) of the Human Rights Convention.  The
standard of proof for Articles 2 and 3 is that there should be substantial
grounds for believing that there is a real risk of treatment contrary to
Article 3 which creates a burden of proof on the appellant which can be
equated with the burden of proof in asylum cases.  It also equates with the
burden and standard of proof in claims for humanitarian protection.  The
standard of proof for Article 8 is that of the balance of probabilities.

Documentation Considered

The respondent had in accordance with the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 submitted the
following documents: an asylum decision letter dated 12th September 2017, a
Statement of Evidence Form dated 31st August 2017, an article from
www.bustle.com entitled "How Does ISIS Recruit, Exactly?  Its Techniques
Are Ruthless, Terrifying and Efficient", a Home Office country request
entitled "Mental Health Treatment in Iraq", a Home Office report dated June
2017 entitled "Iraq: Return/Internal relocation".

The appellant produced documentation for his appeal which included a First
Inventory of Productions, which in turn included a selection of photographs
from 1 to 22. Also produced was an Inventory of Productions II, a witness
statement of the appellant dated 30th October 2017, a letter from Glasgow
City Health and Social Care Partnership dated 20th September 2017, a
statement of correction, clarification, addition and amendment in response
to the record of screening interview, statement of clarification and
correction in response to the record of substantive interview, article ISIS
attacks two villages north of Kirkuk dated 16th October 2017.  An Inventory
of Productions III, included a marriage certificate with certified
translation, Iraqi civil status for the appellant and wife with certified
translations and the Republic of Iraq nationality certificate for the
appellant and his wife.

Expert reports from Dr Alan George dated 11th March 2020 and from Dr E
Joffï¿½, specialist in Middle Eastern contemporary affairs, dated 9th
February 2019 were attached.

For the resumed appeal hearing a further Inventory of Productions was
produced which included a skeleton argument, grounds of appeal, a further
supplementary statement of the appellant dated 8th February 2019 and
supplementary witness statements dated 26th November 2020 and 28th April
2021.

I shall note here that I have read and considered all the papers before me
and where I have been guided to certain passages in the objective material
by a representative, I have read those passages with especial care.
However, I have read them in the context of the entire document.  I have
carefully considered both the expert reports and the articles provided by
both parties prior to reaching my conclusions.

The Appellant's claim

The appellant lived in Kirkuk, a contested area where he worked as a
butcher and a shepherd, and he claims he was approached one night by
members of ISIS who asked him to work for them as an informer.  They warned
him that if he did not help them, they would behead his children and as a
result he and his wife and children fled from Iraq.  When in Turkey, he
left his children with his parents and uncle, who returned them to Iraq.
He feared that he would be targeted by ISIS on return to Iraq and he also
feared his uncle with regards to his marriage to his wife.

The Secretary of State's refusal

The respondent accepted that the appellant was an Iraqi national and that
he spoke Kurdish Sorani and he correctly identified Sulaymaniyah, Dahuk,
Halabja and Kirkuk as provinces in Iraq.  The respondent's refusal letter
considered that the appellant's responses in interview were inconsistent,
for example his children he stated originally were in Turkey and then he
stated that they were in Iraq.  It was not accepted that if he had been
directly threatened with the beheading of his children that his family
would send them back to Iraq.  Further, he stated that he fled to his uncle
when ISIS came to visit and although he stated that he had not told his
uncle that he was being threatened by ISIS, had it been found that his
uncle had helped him, this would have placed him in danger from ISIS.  It
was unclear as to why he thought his uncle would kill him and further, he
would not have approached him.  When asked how he could give the ISIS
information, his response as to why the ISIS would recruit him was not
accepted because it was inconsistent with background material.  It was not
accepted that ISIS would seek to recruit him, a shepherd, to assist them
because ISIS' main route for recruitment was through the media and social
media.  It was not accepted that ISIS would approach him and run the risk
of him notifying the authorities.

It was put to him as to why it was a problem for him to live in Erbil near
his uncle and he explained that the uncle had five children and wished one
of his sons to be married to his wife.  The appellant stated that his in-
laws agreed to the marriage, but his uncle did not.  It was considered that
his responses were vague, lacking in detail and evasive.  It was not
accepted that the appellant was ever threatened by ISIS or that he was
threatened by his uncle as he claimed.

In relation to risk on return the Secretary of State's refusal letter
stated that the respondent would only return the appellant to the IKR if he
originated from the IKR.  He had stated in interview that he had lived in
Daratu in the IKR beside Erbil, also known as Hewler, which was part of the
KRG.  It was not accepted that he was ever threatened by either ISIS or his
uncle and it was considered that he could use the same resilience that he
had shown in relocating to the United Kingdom to re-establish his life in
Iraq.

Further, it was considered that the appellant had failed to meet the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and there were no exceptional
circumstances.  Additionally, with regards mental health, the Secretary of
State confirmed that there were basic health services in Iraq and most
mental disorders cold be treated in primary health centres and in hospitals
albeit mental health remained stigmatised.

The Hearing

At the hearing the appellant confirmed that he could understand the
interpreter in Kurdish Sorani, and he adopted his statements dated 8th
February 2019, 26th November 2020 and 28th April 2021.

In response to questioning and my request for clarification on his
geographical relocation in Iraq, the appellant confirmed that he had
married at the start of 2014 and at that time he was living in Erbil.  He
stayed for approximately two weeks after he married and then moved to the
village of Nem Alaqer in the western part of Kirkuk.  That was about an
hour and a half from Erbil.  He stated that he moved to his home village in
order to save his life.  He was asked why he had referred to Daratu in his
asylum interview and explained that he was displaced by the former regime
of Saddam Hussein and Daratu was a compound (apparently near Erbil), and he
was forcibly displaced from his own area.  He lived there until the day he
moved to Alaqer, which was a village that belonged to the town of Dibis and
Dibis was in the province of Kirkuk.  Kirkuk was a disputed area.  He
stated that he moved to Alaqer when he was faced with a problem in Erbil
with his wife's maternal uncle because he threatened to kill him, and he
had just moved quietly to the village.

Under cross-examination he was asked what other family members lived there
in Erbil and he stated that he had none.

Mr Walker submitted that he relied on the refusal letter.  The appellant
and his wife had CSID cards, and they would be expected to relocate to
Kirkuk, which was not in the IKR.  This was a case which was unusual and a
family split on the journey.  The children were left now with the
grandparents and two children had subsequently been born in the United
Kingdom.

Mr Forrest submitted that their evidence was from four sources, the
appellant himself, his mother and the two experts.  I was invited to accept
that the appellant's evidence was credible and reliable.  The expert report
of Dr George underlined the fact that the threat from ISIS was still real
albeit that it was less than in 2017.  The doctor's report confirmed the
claim that he would be unable to integrate into Iraq and his private life
would be interfered with disproportionately.

It had previously been found that the appellant could return to Erbil, but
he was no longer registered in the IKR but in Kirkuk, which was a contested
area and not in the IKR.

Analysis

In his statement of 2017 the appellant related he had left Iraq on 1st
March 2017, travelling via Turkey with his family with valid Iraqi
identification documents and on entry to the United Kingdom claimed asylum
on 15th March 2017.  It aids his credibility that he claimed asylum
promptly on entry to the United Kingdom together with his wife and further
explained in his screening interview that he left Iraq because of his fear
of Daesh/ISIS.

To his credit, at the very outset in his screening interview, the appellant
gave an account of his difficulty on return and has not wavered from this.
He further produced his CSID documents.  He stated that ISIS came to his
house in Dibis, Kirkuk and they threatened to kill him if he did not work
for them.  In his asylum interview on 31st August 2017 the appellant was
consistent and explained, in fact in some detail, in the interview and in
particular from question 36 onwards that he had been visited by Daesh/ISIS
and was asked to work for them as an informer and that if he refused, he
was told, they would behead his children and behead him.  He explained that
they visited his house on 22nd February 2017 and they repeated their visit.
 ISIS initially introduced themselves as Peshmerga and that because he
lived on the border of the IKR and those areas controlled by the government
of Iraq, in fact they were from ISIS and had crossed over that border.  He
explained at question 46 that they came "sneaking into the village they
behead people.  It has happened in our village and other around villages".
He was told that they needed "more members and to collect information from
this side [of the border] to that side they want more people to work for
them".

The appellant explained that as a shepherd he would be able to give them
access to information and bearing in mind that geographical information
would be important in order to occupy ground, I find the account credible.
To have local knowledge is self evidently valuable.

At question 49 of his asylum interview, indeed, the appellant outlined:
"They want to know all the defence point from the Peshmerga side we go out
into the field we come across all the points or checkpoints (sic)".  The
appellant also explained that he did not report them to the Peshmerga
because he was scared if he said anything he would not be able to escape.
The following morning he called his own uncle and removed himself with his
children.  That he did not explain to his uncle the reasons for his
departure does not necessarily undermine the appellant's claim.  The
appellant also explained that ISIS sometimes used the uniform of Peshmerga
in which to travel effectively in disguise.

I find that the appellant did not attempt to embellish his claim and
explained that he had not had problems with Daesh previously to this point,
[question 66 AIR].  In his witness statement of 25th October 2017, (I
assume that the reference to 22nd February 2016 is a mistake because the
appellant is consistent with the rest of the detail in his witness
statement), he confirmed that he left Iraq on 27th February 2017.

I have factored into my consideration of the appellant's account the report
from the expert Dr George, who is a freelance writer, journalist,
consultant and academic and a respected expert specialising in Middle
Eastern political and economic affairs.  I accept his report as informed
and balanced and note that he has given evidence in numerous appeals in the
Immigration and Asylum Chamber.

It should be recalled that the appellant claimed that he was threatened in
early 2017 albeit that the Islamic states were defeated finally in late
2017, but as outlined at paragraph 76 of Dr George's report, ISIS was still
active in the appellant's area and remains so.  Dr George stated at
paragraph 77 that

         "although the security situation in Iraq has generally improved
         significantly since the defeat of ISIS, the group has re-
         established itself as an underground insurgent movement in areas
         seized from it"

    and he noted that:

"The disputed territories between the Iraqi central government and
autonomous Kurdistan region in the North West of the country have recently
witnessed a rise in Islamic state attacks, foreshadowing long-term security
threats and forcing people from dozens of villages to flee their homes.

The vast disputed lands, consisting of Kirkuk [my underlining] and parts of
Nineveh, Saladin and Diyala provinces, have been a point of high contention
between the central government and the Kurdistan Regional Government for
decades.  ISIS started regrouping in the area after losing control over
major cities such as Mosul."

Dr George at paragraph 79 referred to "ISIS in Iraq: Militants 'getting
stronger again'":

"Kurdish and western intelligence officials have told the BBC that the ISIS
presence in Iraq is a sophisticated insurgency, and ISIS attacks are
increasing.

...

'They have better techniques, better tactics and a lot more money at their
disposal'.

...

There is now a vast area of no man's land in northern Iraq between Kurdish
Peshmerga security forces and their Iraqi counterparts.

...

The only ones patrolling in this area are ISIS.

...

ISIS is 10,000 strong in Iraq with between 4,000 and 5,000 fighters, and a
similar number of sleeper cells and sympathisers."

At paragraph 138 Dr George confirmed the ongoing and continuing threat to
the appellant as follows:

"Mr O claims to have fled Iraq largely because of the threat of retaliation
from ISIS after he refused to operate as an informer on their behalf.  If
the Tribunal was to determine that his testimony on this point is credible,
it could be plausible that he would now be a target for ISIS vengeance, at
least in the area where ISIS continues to operate."

And at paragraph 139:

"In this regard I note that ISIS has suffered severe blows and no longer
controls territory other than sporadically and at night; but that the group
continues to operate clandestinely over a large area of North Central Iraq,
including northern parts of Kirkuk governorate."

Although Dr George conceded that the appellant would not be a prime target
for attack, in his opinion "anyone who had defied ISIS would have reason to
fear being targeted by them".  At paragraph 141 Dr George accepted that he
would not be at real risk from ISIS in the KRG-controlled parts of Iraq
which indicates that the report was considered and balanced.

The appellant produced his Iraqi civil status and Iraqi nationality
certificates for both himself and his wife and his children still in Iraq.
It assists his credibility that he has produced documentation to verify his
identity, but it also assists in identifying his movements in Iraq.  In his
asylum interview he confirmed that he was born in Hewler (Erbil), and this
is confirmed in his documentation.  The documentation shows that he married
in 2014 in Erbil, as indeed that of his wife was born in Erbil and that he
was then registered in the Nationality Directorate in Kirkuk governorate in
Dibis (Dubis). Although in his asylum interview, he stated that he had
lived in the town of Daratu around Hewler, [Erbil], and was asked if he had
lived anywhere else and he stated "no, just in my own village", [question
9], he did proceed confirm that he lived in Kirkuk, and thus he did refer
to both places.   Indeed Dubis is a town to the north of Kirkuk in the
Kirkuk governorate and not in the IKR.  I accept that nuances of meaning of
questions and answers may be lost through interpretation.

Overall I find the appellant's account of his risk from ISIS to be
credible.  His account is supported by the unchallenged expert report of Dr
George.  Indeed, neither expert report was challenged. It is also confirmed
by the report of Mr E Joffï¿½, who has specialised in Iraqi affairs since
1980 when he was editor for the Middle Eastern North Africa at The
Economist Intelligence Unit and a lecturer at King's College London
University and previously an affiliated lecturer at the Department of
Politics and International Studies in the University of Cambridge in
relation to international relations of the Middle East and North Africa.
This expert confirmed that he understood his duty in compiling the report
was to the court and that he had complied with the guidance on expert
witness testimony as outlined in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia
(CG) [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).

The account given by the appellant to the experts was consistent with the
remaining evidence in his witness statements and his oral evidence. Indeed
he confirmed that in the wake of his marriage in 2014 because the inter-
family conflict had been so bad, the appellant and his new bride moved away
from Daratu into a village called Awa Alager (Alaqer) in Kurdish) to the
south of Erbil in the neighbouring governorate of Kirkuk's Dibis district
in February 2014.  Mr Joffï¿½ confirmed that this was outside the Kurdish
Autonomous Region and is one of the contested areas. Although it was said
to be under the control of the Peshmerga, ISIS had penetrated up to the
borders and ISIS-controlled territory was very close to the appellant's
village.  Mr Joffï¿½ addressed the issue of the appellant relocating to the
KRG and stated at paragraph 25:

"He would only be able to establish permanent residence in Kurdistan if he
has a Kurdish permanent residence sponsor and has fulfilled the Regulations
for internally displaced persons in Iraq.  ...  In addition, the current
crisis in northern Iraq has made access much more difficult."

The country background material including the report US Department of State
Country Reports on Terrorism dated 19th July 2017 confirmed that the
government had made progress towards defeating ISIS but 'severe internal
security threats endured' and some of Kirkuk had not been reclaimed (i.e.
ISIS retained a presence in the Kirkuk governorate).  A further press
article dated 16th October 2017 near the time of the appellant's claimed
threats, reported 'ISIS attacks two village north of Kirkuk'.  This
supports the appellant's contention that he was threatened by ISIS.

At paragraph 124, Mr Joffe confirmed, as at the date of report on 9th
February 2019, that even though ISIS has now been defeated many of its
members who did not escape the country or were killed have dispersed
throughout the population or become sleeper cells.  At paragraphs 75 and 76
Mr Joffï¿½ confirmed that:

"ISIS began to infiltrate villages in the Dibis region, partly because - in
the wake of the Kurdish referendum - Iraqi forces replaced the Peshmerga
and only garrisoned the main roads. Even in early 2019, [my underlining]
ISIS activity was reported just to the South of the Dibis district."

Although Mr Joffï¿½ did not directly address the issue of recruitment and the
Secretary of State considered that the tactics deployed by ISIS in relation
to the employment of the appellant varied between the appellant's account
and the article produced, I do not accept that, particularly as Dr George
stated there was flexibility in tactics that this would rule out the direct
approach to the residents of the local villages.

Although I accept SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG
[2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) refers to Article 15(c), it nonetheless reflects
the security situation and concludes

         'The situation in the Formerly Contested Areas (the governorates of
         Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah and Salah Al-Din) is complex,
         encompassing ethnic, political and humanitarian issues which differ
         by region.  Whether the return of an individual to such an area
         would be contrary to Article 15(c) requires a fact-sensitive,
         "sliding scale" assessment to which the following matters are
         relevant'.

The country background material and the expert reports corroborate the
account given by the appellant that he was targeted by ISIS because he
lived in a region where ISIS was active, according to the expert reports,
at the relevant time; although ISIS may have been theoretically defeated, I
am prepared to accept, against the context of the background material, that
the appellant and his family fled Iraq because of the ISIS threat and would
continue to be exposed to that threat should they return to Dibis, Kirkuk.


In terms of the credibility points taken against the appellant by the
Secretary of State in her refusal, I find that the appellant's explanation
of him being separated from his children by the agents was credible,
because he would have little control over their whereabouts or relocation
in the melee of fleeing the country and in the face of direction from
agents who organised the family's removal.  As the appellant states he and
his wife were also separated. His account is supported by a statement from
his mother.

It would also appear that the Secretary of State confused the identity of
the uncle with whom he stayed when fleeing ISIS with the identity of the
uncle who lived in Erbil.

I do not accept that the appellant would be provided with sufficiency of
protection on return to Kirkuk in the face of the specific threat from
ISIS.

At paragraph 124 Mr Joffï¿½ confirmed that the situation around the borders
of the Kurdish Autonomous Region, particularly since the referendum in
September 2017, was becoming increasingly tense and he would "doubt that
adequate sufficiency of protection is available there either.  Indeed, the
police actually warned Mr O's father that they could not provide him with
protection".

Dr George's report referred at paragraph 79 to 'ISIS in Iraq: militants
getting stronger again' and at paragraph 86 to Iraq's crime rate as very
high and that 'police do not have the resources to combat criminal
elements' and that kidnappings 'have been a significant dimension to the
breakdown in law and order' and which are conducted by 'individuals,
militias and organised criminal groups'.  In the face of a specific threat
from ISIS I do not accept that the appellant would be able to avail himself
of sufficiency of protection.

The updated country guidance from the Secretary of State Country Policy and
Information Note Iraq: Actors of protection Version 1.0 December 2020
reflects the expert reports as follows:

         '6. Capabilities of law enforcement agencies

         6.1 Effectiveness of state security apparatus

         6.1.1  In May 2020 the  USSD  Overseas  Security  Advisory  Council
         (OSAC) published its Crime  and  Safety  Report  for  Baghdad.  The
         report stated that the:

         'ISF has a  limited  ability  to  respond  to  security  incidents,
         terrorist attacks, and  criminal  activities.  Response  times  and
         capabilities may vary wildly, as displayed by their recent response
         to protests at the U.S. Embassy. Iraqi police do not meet  U.S.  or
         western standards. ISF maintains a large  presence  in  most  major
         urban areas to limit potential terrorist,  insurgent,  and  militia
         activity. There are many permanent, manned military checkpoints and
         security stations; temporary  ones  often  appear  without  advance
         notice.'

         6.1.2  The EASO 2018 report noted that according to a February 2018
         OSAC report, 'crime statistics in Iraq and reporting mechanisms are
         incomplete  and  inconsistent  within  Iraqi  law  enforcement  and
         security forces'.

I turn to the next question as to whether the appellant has established
that he cannot return to Erbil (the IKR) and whether he was subject to an
honour crime.  It is surprising that having been born in Erbil and being
someone of Kurdish ethnicity he would not wish to remain in the relatively
safe area of the IKR (KRG).  He explains that he has a fear of his maternal
uncle and in his witness statement gave his name as Massoud.

The appellant made no mention of his fear of his wife's uncle in his
screening interview but in YL [2004] UKIAT 00145 the Tribunal noted that
while the answers given at a screening interview are expected to be true
and may fairly be compared to answers given later, it is not appropriate at
that stage to expect a detailed account of the applicant's asylum claim.
The account should be considered in the light that the interviewee may well
be tired after a long journey and such matters should be borne in mind when
considering inconsistencies between the screening interview and the later
evidence (including the asylum interview).  The appellant, as seen, did
claim asylum promptly, and offered this information in his substantive
asylum interview.

That said, the screening interview is not inconsistent with the asylum
interview.  The screening interview was conducted on 15th March 2017 and
the asylum interview was conducted on 31st August 2017, some five months
later and where the appellant was represented.  When asked at question 81
of his substantive asylum interview, why he did not move within Iraq to
Erbil for example, the appellant responded, apparently without hesitation,
stating:

         "Fear one is Daesh all over the place fear two my wife's family I
         had trouble with them I had no trouble with Hewler before when I
         got married to my wife" (sic).

The appellant gave a relatively lucid account (bearing in mind
interpretation) of the difficulties that he had experienced, and which
included that his wife's uncle wanted her to marry one of his sons.  He
went on to state that his uncle was armed and the appellant "had chosen to
live in a village and not to have any trouble and not to be killed by my in-
laws who is they are armed".

The uncle is an 'in-law' and not the uncle to whom he turned for assistance
when he left and in whom he did not even confide lest it place him in
danger.  It was confirmed at paragraph 119 of Dr George's report that
honour killing is a significant feature in Iraq today, especially in the
Kurdish area, and that the general breakdown in security and law and order
was conducive to the perpetration of such murders.

Dr George noted that the KRG had made some efforts to address the problem
of honour killings but that in effect it was a problem which persisted and
was directed towards women.  He noted, as the appellant consistently stated
that on their marriage, the uncle threatened the couple with death and as a
result Mr O and his wife relocated from the Erbil area to Dibis, located in
the Kirkuk governorate north-west of Kirkuk and outside the KRG-controlled
area but at the time was under the Kurdish Peshmerga control.

Crucially, Dr George stated at paragraph 142:

"On the basis that Mr O's account is accurate - and I appreciate that that
is a matter for the courts to decide - if returned to Iraq he could be at
risk of being targeted by his uncle who, as I understand resides in the
Erbil area, for reasons of honour arising from that uncle's disapproval of
his marriage."

Dr George in his expert report referenced the 'UNHCR's International
Protection Considerations with Regard to People Fleeing the Republic of
Iraq' (May 2019) on honour killings and  added at paragraph 144 that there
was no evidence to suggest that the risk of an individual being targeted
for an honour killing diminished "merely because of the passage of time".
Again he supported his opinions with references to various publications,
noting that the practice dated back to medieval times.  At paragraph 145 Dr
George opined that a person targeted for an honour killing could be at real
risk on this account throughout the country as it was not easy for a
targeted person to relocate anonymously.  "In the close-knit communities
that characterise Iraqi society newcomers stand out and are the subject of
curiosity."

Thus, Dr George confirmed that he thought should the appellant's account be
found credible that he would be at risk in area of Erbil.

The appellant was consistent throughout his witness statements that he was
at risk from his wife's uncle.  It is clear from the documentation that the
appellant married his wife in 2014 as disclosed by the marriage certificate
dated 23rd January 2014. The marriage certificate shows the appellant was
married in the Erbil Civil Court on 23rd January 2014 which suggests as he
claimed that he was resident in Erbil at the time.  The Iraqi civil status
documents for the appellant and his wife, however, were issued on 25th June
2014 in the Department of Dibis.  The Iraqi nationality certificate also
identified their registration place as Dibis. Indeed his assertions in
relation to his relocation within Iraq chime with the chronology as
disclosed in the documentation.

I have found the appellant's account in relation to his threats from ISIS
to have been promptly made and consistent and credible.  The documentation
supports the appellant's account that they moved from Erbil to Dibis
shortly after their marriage. The appellant added the detail that his
wife's family as indicated on the documentation was from a powerful tribe
often associated with connections and government.   I therefore accept that
the appellant might also be at risk from the maternal uncle in Erbil.
There is no reason to suppose that the photographs of the person in the
photographs was the wife's uncle in the Peshmerga were not genuine in view
of my other findings on the credibility of the appellant. Whether the uncle
is said to be armed or not, the appellant may still be at risk.

I am not persuaded that there is sufficiency of protection in either Dibis
or Erbil, in view of Horvath v SSHD [2000] UKHL 37 and SMO.

The Secretary of State in her updated guidance on Country Policy and
Information Note Iraq: 'Honour' crimes March 2021 states as follows at
2.5.5 and 2.5.6

         'Despite the introduction of laws regulating honour crimes in the
         IKR, sources indicate that they are not effectively implemented.
         Taking domestic abuse to court is regarded as shameful and there is
         a widespread discriminatory mindset of judges towards women. The
         police and court system is prone to influence from prominent
         families and tribes which can lead to perpetrators being acquitted
         of charges even when there is clear evidence against them. While
         there have been examples of perpetrators being prosecuted for
         murder, those convicted of 'honour' killings are seldom punished in
         practice (see Enforcement of the law).

         2.5.6  For these reasons, authorities in Iraq and the IKR cannot be
         considered as willing and able to provide effective  protection  to
         those at risk from 'honour' crimes. Decision makers must,  however,
         assess each case on its merits'.

There is no reason to suppose this position was any different at the date
of the decision and it is incumbent upon me to consider the facts as they
are at the date of remaking the decision.  A refword report 'Iraq: Honour-
based violence in the Kurdistan region; state protection and support
service available to victims' dated February 2016 confirmed that 'honour-
based violence is 'not taken seriously' by the police' and that sources
confirmed that 'police are 'unable or unwilling to offer...protection'.

Independent from the protection considerations cited above in relation to
Erbil, Dr George confirmed at paragraph 165 that the KRG authorities are
unlikely to be able to protect the appellant as follows

         'Despite the KRG's security situation being much better than in the
         rest of Iraq Kurdish authorities have a demonstrated inability to
         provide protection for individuals targeted by determined attackers
         notably in situations involving blood feuds, revenge and honour'.

I have found that the appellant is not likely to be able to find
sufficiency of protection in Erbil.

Nor do I find the appellant would be able to relocate within that
relatively small area with the threat from his uncle in law.  Owing to the
requirement for sponsorship in order to relocate, the risk from the uncle
in law will preclude the appellant's return there. Indeed he is no longer
registered in Erbil but as the documents show, in Kirkuk.

As Dr George stated at paragraph 186, relocation within Iraq involves a
lengthy and complex administrative process which carries risks that a
person's antagonists through their contacts and sympathisers within
administrative offices will learn that person's new address.  In that case
the appellant would be denied the subsidised support on which the great
many majority of Iraqis would depend.

I have taken into account the country guidance of SMO and consider that it
would not be safe for the appellant to relocate to the governorate of
Kirkuk or within those contested areas.  As stated by SMO:

         "Even where it is safe for an individual to relocate within the
         formerly contested areas, however, it is unlikely to be either
         feasible or reasonable without a prior connection to, and a support
         structure within, the area in question." [406]

    and

         'Whilst the conditions in those areas do not cross the threshold
         for Article 15(c) or Article 3 ECHR protection, the humanitarian
         considerations in those areas are such that it will often be
         unreasonable to expect an individual to resettle there' [408].

Albeit considered within the Article 15(c) context, this to me, precludes
the option of the appellant relocating elsewhere within the formerly
contested area as per Januzi [2006] UKHL 5.  The appellant, a Kurd and a
Sunni who does not speak Arabic, would have to move with his family to an
area with which he is not familiar and has no connections, and the
documents showed that he has mental health problems.

I conclude that there would very significant obstacles to the appellant
retuning to the IKR or relocating in the remainder of Iraq.

In relation to relocation to Baghdad I note that the country guidance
states that there are sponsorship requirements for residency but that a
documented individual of working age is likely to be able to satisfy those
requirements and that relocation to Baghdad was likely to be reasonable for
Arab Shia and Sunni single, able-bodied men and married couples of working
age without children and without specific vulnerabilities.  Other
individuals are likely to require external support, i.e. a support network
of members of his or her family, extended family or tribe, who are willing
and able to provide genuine support.  Whether such a support network is
available is to be considered with reference to the collectivist nature of
Iraqi society, as considered in AAH (Iraq), [headnote paragraph 19 of SMO].

This appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity and speaks Kurdish not Arabic.
Indeed, it was suggested in the decision letter that he would be returned
not to Baghdad but to Erbil.

Dr George was of the opinion that the appellant would face serious
challenges finding employment and accommodation in non-KRG Iraq and these
would be acute because of his lack of family support.  I have had regard to
the medical report that was produced by Dr Fraser Morrison, clinical
psychologist, on 8th May 2021, who was of the opinion that the appellant's
mental health would be accompanied by a significant deterioration if he
were returned to Iraq.  The appellant presented with a range of symptoms of
a major depressive disorder although these appeared to be linked primarily
to the instability in his life and the separation from his children.  In
fact, Dr Fraser considered that the separation appeared to be "a
significant source of psychological distress".  There was also evidence
that the wife suffered from mental health depression. Overall however this
would add to the difficulties experienced by the appellant and his ability
to relocate although I am not persuaded that those difficulties are such to
support a claim under Article 3 on health grounds applying AM (Zimbabwe)
[2020] UKSC 17.

I consider for the reasons given above that the appellant would be unable
to secure a security of protection should he return to Erbil or to his
previous residency area of Dibis.  I also consider that very significant
obstacles to relocation elsewhere and it is unreasonable to expect the
appellant and his wife to relocate to Baghdad.  For these reasons I will
allow this appeal on asylum and human rights (Article 3) grounds.  By
definition, the appeal is also allowed on Article 8 grounds because of the
very significant obstacles in his return to Iraq. Albeit the appellant
cannot speak English and is not financially independent, his difficulties
in returning to Iraq will outweigh those considerations under Section 117B
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Order

I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

I allow the appeal on human rights grounds (Articles 3 and 8).



Signed        Helen Rimington                    Date 1st September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        Helen Rimington                     Date  1st  September  2021



Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
