
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09494/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th June 2019                    |On 12th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     M T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Moore, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal from the decision of Judge Gaskell to dismiss the
Appellant's appeal from the decision by the Secretary of State to refuse
his protection claim.  I continue the anonymity direction that was made in
the First-tier Tribunal

Background

The Respondent had refused an earlier protection claim on 11th January
2013.  That claim had been based upon the Appellant's account of being
detained and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities by reason of his
suspected involvement with Tamil separatism. The Appellant's appeal against
that refusal was dismissed by Judge Birkby in a decision promulgated on
17th April 2013.  Judge Birkby had not found the Appellant to be a credible
witness of truth and disbelieved his account of having been detained and
tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities as a suspected Tamil separatist.

On 4th May 2018, the Appellant's representatives made further submissions.
They submitted further evidence that had not been before Judge Birkby,
including a further medical report in support of the Appellant's claim to
have been tortured whilst in Sri Lanka and evidence of numerous sur place
activities undertaken by the Appellant whilst in the UK in support of the
Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE).  The Respondent considered
the new evidence and accepted that it amounted to "a fresh claim" under
paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules, but nevertheless substantively
refused it for reasons contained in an explanatory letter dated 18th
December 2018.  It is the dismissal of the appeal from that decision
against which the Appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal, having been
granted permission to do so by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

Before considering the grounds, I shall set out the kernel of Judge
Gaskell's decision, beginning at paragraph 47.

47.  In my judgment, the two central questions which must be answered in
this case are:

(a)  Were the Appellant's activities in Sri Lanka before his departure such
that upon his return he is likely to be arrested and interrogated?

(b)  Are his activities within the UK such that he will have come to the
adverse attention of the Sri Lankan authorities; and again, upon return is
he likely to be arrested and interrogated.

48.  If the answer to either of these questions is in the affirmative then,
applying the guidance in GJ, I must inevitably conclude that, upon return
to Sri Lanka, the Appellant would be at risk of further detention; further
torture; and possibly death.  If however, the Appellant's account is
unreliable, and there is no basis to conclude that he is of any interest to
the Sri Lankan authorities and he could safely return.

49.  In my judgment, the answer to both of these questions is in the
negative.  I have applied the lower standard of proof and I am not
persuaded that the Appellant is at risk on either basis.

50.  The Appellant's account of what happened in Sri Lanka has already been
found to be not credible.  And, applying the principle in Devaseelan, I
cannot depart from that finding absent new evidence which persuades me to
do so.  My judgment is that there is no such new evidence.

51.  Throughout his evidence before me the Appellant speaks of fleeing from
Sri Lanka in 2010: but this is misleading.  The Appellant left Sri Lanka
with a student visa issued in his own name.  On the basis of what is known
about the Sri Lankan authorities, he could not have departed the country
without their knowledge; and, if the Appellant's account was true, he would
have been apprehended at the airport.

52.  In my judgment, this is a case where Section 8 of the 2004 Act comes
fully into play: the Appellant was living in the UK for two years before
making his application; he knew about immigration control because he had
applied for the visa before coming to the UK and he knew that his visa was
to expire in April 2012; rather than making an application to regularise
his status in the UK after April 2012, or make an application for asylum,
the Appellant departed the UK in March 2012 for Germany; he took no step to
make an application for asylum until after his arrest by German immigration
authorities.

53.  As I have already indicated, whilst it is clear that the Appellant is
active in a number of organisations supportive of the cause of Tamil
separatism, he is not a leader or organiser.  In my judgment, he does not
have a profile which would have attracted the attention of the Sri Lankan
authorities.  The only element of the evidence which exists which, if
believed, would support the proposition that he is known to the Sri Lankan
authorities is the Appellant's account of a gunpoint threat made to his
brother.  However, I find this account to be not credible for the simple
reason that, in my judgment, if such a threat had been made; and, if it was
taken seriously, then quite simply the Appellant would have desisted in his
public activities in the UK rather than place his brother's life at risk.

54.  My judgment is that the Appellant is not in one of the at risk
categories identified in GJ.  For these reasons the appeal in respect of
asylum; humanitarian protection; Article 2 ECHR; and those aspects of the
Article 3 claim which relate to his likely treatment because of political
activity are all dismissed.

55.  Regarding the Appellant's current medical condition, and his claim
that based on this his enforced return to Sri Lanka would breach his
Article 3 ECHR rights, my judgment is, that, whilst he clearly has mental
health problems, these appear to be related to anxiety about his
immigration claims and his desire to remain in the UK.  No evidence has
been provided to me that appropriate medical care would not be available to
him in Sri Lanka; and I do not find therefore that his medical condition is
such that his return to Sri Lanka would breach his Article 3 rights.

The grant of permission to appeal

In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul said as
follows:

It is arguable that the judge's conclusion that the Appellant was not an
organiser is contradictory.  It also appears that at [46] the judge
accepted that some of the Appellant's activities had been reported in Sri
Lanka.  In the light of the acceptance of his involvement with the TGTE, it
is arguable that these errors are material, KK (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ
59 notwithstanding.

Permission is granted on all grounds, although there is very limited merit
in the submission that Article 3 is engaged on account of mental ill
health.

It is observed that the Appellant will need to explain the evidential basis
for the submission at [16] that the Appellant will be questioned on return.

I should say at the outset that Mr Lewis did not pursue the ground
concerning the risk to the Appellant's mental health on return under
Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention. I shall not therefore consider
this further.

Analysis

The kernel of the Grounds of Appeal appears at paragraphs 12 to 14 of the
renewed application to the Upper Tribunal:

12.  The judge dismissed the appeal and in doing so stated as follows:
[para 45]

'... but there was no evidence to show that the Appellant was the organiser
of such events or campaigns.'

13.  With respect, given that the judge had referred to a leader of the
TGTE having attended the hearing and who described the Appellant as an
'organiser' in the preceding paragraph of the determination it is entirely
unreasonable for the judge to assert that there was 'no evidence' to show
that he had such a role.  The judge then relied upon this finding to find
that he does not have a 'profile which would have attracted the attention
of the Sri Lankan authorities' [para 53].  Accordingly it is contended that
the error in the assessment of the evidence was clearly material.

14.  The judge then rejects the Appellant's account of his brother having
been questioned and threatened on account of his role within the Diaspora
solely on account of his finding that had the Appellant's brother received
such a threat then he would have ceased his involvement [para 53].  The
Appellant specifically addressed this and stated that he had continued in
his activities on account of his belief that this was the only way to bring
about change in Sri Lanka.

There can be little doubt that on the judge's own account of the evidence
that he heard, it was factually incorrect to suggest that there had been no
evidence that the Appellant was an "organiser" of events on behalf of the
TGTE.  Thus, at paragraph 44, he recites the evidence of the Deputy
Minister of Sports and Community Heath for the TGTE as including a
statement that, "... the appellant was a volunteer who has helped in
organising several public events in the UK" and yet, at paragraph 46, the
judge states, "... there was no evidence to show that the appellant was the
organiser of such events ...". It is clearly an error of law to make a
finding that is unsupported by evidence or, worse, to make a finding that
is incompatible with the evidence. The extent to which this error was
material to the outcome of the appeal (if at all) is considered at
paragraphs 10 to 13, below.

I am less impressed by the complaint made about the judge's rejection of
the Appellant's account of his brother being questioned and threatened by
reason of his role within the diaspora.  It seems to me to be implicit in
the judge's finding that he rejected as implausible the Appellant's claim
that he was willing to put his brother's life at risk for the greater cause
of achieving change in Sri Lanka.  I therefore find that the judge did not
err in making that finding.

Reconsideration

I note that there is no challenge to the fact that Judge Gaskell followed
and adopted the findings of Judge Birkby concerning the appellant's claim
that he was detained and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities by reason
of his activities in support of Tamil separatism.  I therefore preserve
that aspect of the decision.  Moreover, for the reasons I gave in the
previous paragraph, I also preserve the finding concerning the Appellant's
claim that his brother had been threatened in Sri Lanka by reason of his
(the Appellant's) activities in the UK.

I conduct my assessment of the risk on return on the basis that the TGTE is
a proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka. It follows that if there is a real
risk that the Sri Lankan authorities either are or may become aware of the
appellant's involvement as an organiser of TGTE events in the United
Kingdom, he will be perceived as, "... a threat to the integrity of Sri
Lanka as a single state because [he has or is perceived to have] a
significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the
diaspora" (see risk category 7(a) in  GJ and others [2013] UKUT 00319 IAC).


Mr Lewis criticised the judge for failing to give weight to what were said
to be press reports in Sri Lanka of the appellant's activities in the
United Kingdom. He was however unable to point me to any translations of
those reports confirming that this was what was in fact being reported in
the newspaper articles contained within the appellant's bundles of
documents.

Mr Lewis also criticised the judge for his dismissive characterisation of
the events with which the appellant had been involved as, "innocuous". I
consider that this criticism has some force, for whilst it is true that
those events have seemingly innocuous titles (such as 'sports meet', 'keep
Britain tidy', and 'blood donation campaign') it is equally true that the
appellant made it clear that some of these events were held in order to
commemorate the heroism of a particular Tamil military leader (see
paragraph 50 of his witness statement, dated the 4th May 2019). I shall
therefore take account of this in conducting my own assessment of the risk
to the appellant on return.

I also have regard to the nature of the appellant's acts of organisation.
Essentially, these have involved leading a team of volunteers in
publicising events and acting as a uniformed marshal at them (see paragraph
50 of his witness statement, infra).

Given the above, I have no doubt that if the Sri Lankan authorities are or
were to become aware of the Appellant's activities in the UK, then they
would conclude that he had played a significant role in post-conflict
separatism and thus to pose a risk to the unitary state. However, for the
reasons I have given above, I am not satisfied that there is evidence to
show that the Sri Lankan authorities are currently aware of these
activities.

Concerning the evidence that the appellant would be questioned on return,
Mr Lewis relied upon the Home Office guidance dated 28th August 2014
entitled, "Tamil Separatism".  That guidance is cited at paragraphs 10 to
12 of the decision of the Court of Appeal in UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ
85.  In particular, Mr Lewis relied on a letter attached to that guidance,
dated 25th July 2014, as quoted at paragraph 13:

The spokesperson from the DIE stated that returnees may be questioned on
arrival by immigration, CID, SIS and TID.  They may be questioned about
what they have been doing whilst out of Sri Lanka, including whether they
have been involved with one of the Tamil Diaspora groups.  He said that it
was normal practice for returnees to be asked about their activities in the
country they were returning from.

The spokesman from the SIS said that people being 'deported' will always be
questioned about their overseas activities, including whether they have
been involved with one of the proscribed organisations.  He said that
members of the organisations are not banned from returning to Sri Lanka,
they are allowed to return, but will be questioned on arrival and may be
detained.

Given this evidence, I have concluded that there is a real risk that the
appellant would be questioned on return to Sri Lanka about his activities
whilst in the United Kingdom. As he would be under no obligation to be
untruthful about those activities, I conclude that there is a real risk
that the appellant would at that stage be perceived as a threat to the
unitary state of Sri Lanka and would consequently suffer ill-treatment
amounting to persecution by reason of his political opinion.

Notice of Decision

The appeal from the First-tier Tribunal is  allowed.  The  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal is set aside  and  is  substituted
by a decision to allow the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 8 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
