
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                        |                                      |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      |Appeal Number: PA/09888/2019 (P)      |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2020                   |                        On 14        |
|                                      |December 2020                        |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                    [N S]
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAD)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a Pakistani  national  who  appeals,  with  permission
    granted by Judge Wilson, against a decision which was issued  by  Judge
    Sorrell on 22 April 2020.  By that decision, the  judge  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.


 2. It is accepted by the respondent that the judge fell into  legal  error
    and that her decision must be set aside.  I agree with that  concession
    and shall set aside the FtT's decision.  My reasons for doing so may be
    stated succinctly in the circumstances.

Background

 3. The appellant has been in the UK since  2010,  when  he  entered  as  a
    student.  An  application  for  further  leave  was  refused  in  2012,
    however, and  he  has  remained  without  leave  since  then.   Another
    application for leave to remain was refused in 2012 and  he  also  made
    two applications  for  an  EEA  Residence  Card,  both  of  which  were
    unsuccessful.  Years passed and, in 2017, the appellant was served with
    various forms as a precursor to removal.  This prompted  him  to  claim
    asylum in December 2017.

 4. Unusually, the basis upon which the appellant claimed  asylum  and  the
    basis upon which he had previously sought an EEA  Residence  Card  were
    closely linked.  The appellant stated that he had contracted a marriage
    to a Portuguese lady whilst he was in the United Kingdom and  that  his
    choice of spouse had given rise to a dispute in Pakistan.   The  family
    had intended him to marry another woman, and that had been agreed  when
    the appellant was a young boy.

 5. The respondent, however, considered that the relationship  was  nothing
    more than a sham.  In so concluding, she relied upon an interview  with
    the Portuguese spouse, in which she had  told  an  immigration  officer
    that she had been paid a sum of money to marry the appellant  and  that
    he had assured her that they would swiftly divorce.  The respondent was
    also concerned that the appellant had used a  proxy  to  take  a  TOEIC
    English test in the past.  Accordingly, the asylum claim  was  refused.



The Appeal to the FtT

 6. The appellant appealed to the FtT and  her  appeal  was  heard  by  the
    judge, sitting in Glasgow,  on  14  February  2020.   In  her  reserved
    decision, the judge noted  that  the  appeal  proceeded  on  protection
    grounds only.  She noted that the appellant denied contracting  a  sham
    marriage or cheating in an English test.  She then made  the  following
    findings.  Firstly, she did not accept that the appellant  had  entered
    into a genuine relationship with the Portuguese  national.   She  based
    that conclusion on what had been said by the  woman  in  question  when
    interviewed by an Immigration Officer and on her  inability  to  accept
    what had been said by the appellant  in  an  attempt  to  answer  those
    admissions.  As a result, she was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant
    would  experience  any  problems  on  return  to  Pakistan.   She   was
    reinforced in her conclusion as to the appellant's credibility  by  his
    failure to claim asylum more promptly.


 7. In dealing with the allegation that the appellant had  cheated  in  his
    English language test, at [22], the judge concluded as follows:

         Furthermore, I  am  satisfied  from  the  Respondent's  documentary
         evidence lodged  in  their  2nd  bundle  that  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities, the Appellant's English language test  taken  on  22
         February 2012 at Elizabeth College, London was  "invalid"  in  that
         reliable evidence exists of proxy test taking and/or  impersonation
         and that he therefore used deception in order to  pass  this  test.
         ("ETS SELT Source Data" "ETS TOEIC Test  Centre  Lookup  Tool"  and
         "Project Faï¿½ade" -  criminal  inquiry  into  abuse  of  the  TOEIC,
         Elizabeth College, London).

 8. The judge then summarised her conclusions at [23] before dismissing the
    appeal.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Wilson summarised  the  grounds
    of appeal and the basis of his decision in this way:


         The grounds assert that the judge erred in that the judge failed to
         give adequate reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's  evidence  in
         relation to risk  on  return  to  Pakistan;  considered  irrelevant
         matters when making credibility findings and failed  to  adequately
         assess whether the appellant used deception in his English language
         test.


         In an otherwise careful decision, it is nonetheless  arguable  that
         the judge failed to adequately assess the use of deception  in  the
         appellant's English language test.

10. Judge Wilson's decision was sent to the parties in May, after which the
    file was placed before the Vice President.  He formed  the  provisional
    view that the appeal might be fairly and justly  determined  without  a
    hearing and he made directions for submissions on that course of action
    and on the merits of the appeal.  Written submissions were duly made by
    the appellant's solicitors and by  Mr  Whitwell,  a  Senior  Presenting
    Officer, on behalf of the respondent.


11. I should record that I consider it fair and just in  the  circumstances
    of this case to proceed without a hearing.  Above all, I consider there
    to be no need for a hearing when the  outcome  is  agreed  between  the
    parties.

Analysis

12. The respondent's position is set out with precision  and  concision  in
    the email which was filed and served by  Mr  Whitwell  on  7  September
    2020.  He accepts that the judge erred in  law  in  the  way  that  she
    resolved the dispute over whether the  appellant  had  cheated  in  his
    English language test.  Whilst the judge was  correct  to  accept  that
    there was sufficient material to overcome the initial evidential burden
    on the respondent, she failed  to  consider  in  any  way  at  all  the
    remaining steps of the enquiry required by cases such  as  Muhandiramge
    [2015] UKUT 675.  Given that it is clear from the judge's decision that
    her conclusion regarding the English test was a material  part  of  her
    overall conclusion  on  the  appellant's  credibility,  the  respondent
    accepts that her decision cannot stand.


13. I consider this concession to be  correct.   The  judge  was  certainly
    entitled - as a result of Shehzad & Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615 -  to
    conclude that the evidence presented  by  the  respondent  sufficed  to
    discharge the evidential burden of  proof.   But  the  judge  was  then
    required to consider whether the  appellant  had  adduced  an  innocent
    explanation which  was  capable  of  belief  and  whether,  all  things
    considered, the respondent had discharged the legal burden upon her  of
    disproving that explanation.  The judge failed to consider those  steps
    in any way at all and that part of the decision which I have reproduced
    at [7] above is accordingly unsound.

14. I have reflected, as the respondent did, on the question of whether the
    remaining findings can be saved  notwithstanding  the  judge's  obvious
    error in relation to the English Language Test.  Like the respondent, I
    do not consider that to be possible.  The judge's conclusion  that  the
    appellant had cheated in his English test was clearly a  material  part
    of her overall assessment of  his  credibility.   In  circumstances  in
    which a material part of that overall assessment is so plainly  flawed,
    I do not consider that any part of the decision can stand.

15. It follows that the decision of the FtT  must  be  set  aside  and  the
    entire decision on the appeal must be remade.  Given the scope of  that
    exercise, the proper forum for it is the FtT and I will order that  the
    appeal be remitted to be heard by any judge other than Judge Sorrell.

16. I must add this.  On any proper view of this case, the appellant  faces
    a formidable task.  Quite aside from any question about the  ETS  test,
    the interview with the Portuguese national and the  delay  in  claiming
    asylum  present  him  with  significant  difficulty  in  terms  of  his
    credibility.  And, as Mr Whitwell helpfully observed at the end of  his
    written submissions, there might well be a sufficiency of protection on
    return to Pakistan even if all that the  appellant  says  is  true:  AW
    (Pakistan) [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC).  In light of the fact-sensitive nature
    of that question, however, it is necessary for the Tribunal to consider
    whether this appellant can secure the assistance he  might  require  in
    Pakistan  in  light  of  the  primary   findings   of   fact   reached:
    Bagdanavicius [2004] 1 WLR 1207 refers, at [55](6).

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.   The  decision  of
the FtT is set aside and the appeal is remitted  to  the  FtT  to  be  heard
afresh by a judge other than Judge Sorrell.

Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
this decision because this is a protection appeal and it  reduces  the  risk
to the appellant in the event that his  appeal  is  ultimately  unsuccessful
and he is returned to Pakistan.

Postcript

This decision was finalised and sent to the administrative  staff  at  Field
House for promulgation on 18 November.  On 20  November,  Fordham  J  handed
down judgment in R (JCWI) v President of UTIAC [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin).   I
have considered whether  to  alter  the  decision  above  in  light  of  the
Administrative Court's decision in the JCWI  case.   Since  the  result  was
agreed between the parties, I have decided not to do so.  No useful  purpose
would be served by seeking further submissions or holding a hearing  in  the
circumstances, and the proper course remains as above.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                             11 January 2021













