
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10501/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2019                            |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                 Bashir [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Although this Decision was dictated immediately following the hearing,
regrettably the file was then mislaid which is why this Decision is only
now being promulgated.  The Tribunal apologises to the parties for this
delay.

The appellant is a national of Somalia who appeals against a decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence, who dismissed his appeal against
the respondent's decision refusing to revoke a deportation order which had
been made against him, in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 2 October
2018, following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 21 September 2018.  It is not
necessary for the purposes of this decision to deal with the merits of the
appellant's case, nor, for the reasons which will follow, is it necessary
to deal with the potential errors of law identified in Judge Lawrence's
decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane, when granting permission to
appeal.

Before me, on behalf of the respondent, Ms Cunha stated as follows:

"It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in his
consideration of the medical report before him in relation to the
appellant's previous history of mental ill health and did not consider this
properly in his decision starting at paragraph 21.

I note that there is a reference within that paragraph to there being 'no
evidence of any treatment he received during that period'.  However, there
was evidence that the appellant had been sectioned at around that time and
there was also evidence of the appellant seeking the assistance of the NHS
in relation to his health which was not considered by the judge.

What is worrying is that not only has the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed
to consider this evidence, but he has used the omission of such evidence
(which in fact existed) to undermine the appellant's credibility, thus
making adverse findings.

For these reasons, we agree that the decision is unsafe because this error
infects the whole decision."

Ms Cunha then invited the Tribunal to remit this appeal for a de novo
rehearing before any judge other than Judge Lawrence, with no findings to
be retained.

On behalf of the appellant, Mr Dhanji endorsed this approach, and, having
given careful consideration to all the material contained within the file,
the Tribunal agrees.

Although, as already noted above, these are not the reasons set out by
Judge Keane for why he granted permission to appeal, they are sufficient to
render Judge Lawrence's decision unsafe and for these reasons, I set aside
his decision as containing a material error of law and direct that the
appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, sitting at Harmondsworth (or
wherever else is appropriate for logistical reasons) for a rehearing with
no findings retained.  It is accordingly unnecessary to make any findings
with regard to the other potential errors of law identified by Judge Keane
in his decision granting permission to appeal.



Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence as
containing a material error of law and direct that this appeal be remitted
for rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal, sitting at Harmondsworth or,
if necessary for logistical reasons elsewhere, for rehearing by any judge
other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 13 May 2019

