
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10912/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th May 2019                     |On 10th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Khan of Counsel, instructed by Andrew Williams
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of Judge
O'Neill made following a hearing at Bradford on 7th December 2018.

Background

The claimant is a citizen of Albania born on 30th March 1980. He left
Albania on 1st October 2014 and travelled to Greece and then on to the UK
via the Netherlands and France.  He arrived in the UK on 10th December
2014, but  did not bring himself to the attention of the authorities until
1st June 2015 when he claimed asylum on the basis that he would be at risk
on return to Albania as a consequence of a blood feud which existed between
his family and the family of a man whom he had murdered in 2004.

When he was 18, the claimant committed the murder in his home village when
he became embroiled in a barroom fight with members of the S family during
which he stabbed and killed DS in front of the victim's father.  He
asserted that he was acting in self-defence but this was rejected by the
Albanian court.  The court, however, accepted that he had shown deep
repentance for his actions and had pleaded guilty.  He was sentenced to
twelve years in prison but was released on 19th July 2013 for good
behaviour.

The claimant said that during his imprisonment his family moved away from
their home village to a town 60 kilometres away.  The judge accepted that
they did so because of their fear of a blood feud with the S family.

The claimant's brother gave evidence that he visited his parents in April
2015, about six months after the claimant had left the country, and about
three days after his arrival three men burst into his house, looking for
his brother.  They made threats to him that they would harm him.  The
claimant's brother threatened to call the police if they did not leave and
eventually they did so, having caused a disturbance but without harming
anyone.  He went to the house of a relative, where he remained for the rest
of his stay.

The judge accepted that the incident had taken place as described and that
threats had been made to kill the claimant.

The claimant himself also received threats after his release from the S
family by telephone and says that in April 2014 he was attacked on the
street by three men whom he did not know.  Whilst in hospital, he received
a visit from the police and he expected that they had come to take details
of the attack to enable him to press charges.  However, the police
dismissed his complaint but presented him with an arrest warrant accusing
him of having been caught in the act of burglary and stealing two mobile
phones.

The judge did not accept that the S family or their agents had been lying
in wait for the claimant and concluded that he had failed to show that
there was a reasonable possibility that the attack was perpetuated as part
of a feud with the S family.  Neither did he accept that there was a
realistic possibility that the police were acting in a conspiracy with them
to frame the claimant although that was his genuine belief.  The judge said
that the police may well have been predisposed against him because of his
criminal record.  The judge was unable to reach any conclusion as to who
had attacked him or why.

The judge did not consider that the claimant had established that there was
a blood feud under the Kanun code because they were now rare, occurred
mostly in the northern part of the country and the village of the victim's
family was not in the north, this was not a longstanding feud running from
generation to generation and the threats seem only to have been targeted at
the claimant.  There had been no other killings connected to the feud and
whilst the family had moved they did not feel obliged to go into hiding.

The judge wrote as follows:

"In the circumstances even if the threat of revenge falls short of a blood
feud as defined in EH (Albania) I nevertheless find that the appellant is
at risk of serious harm by way of revenge by the S family and as such is
entitled to humanitarian protection and it would be a breach of the ECHR
were he to be removed to Albania in the circumstances.

I accept the evidence of Mr LH that the S family had tracked him down in
the parents' home in a distant town and I infer were informed somehow of
his arrival.  I conclude that they would be able to track down the
appellant were he to return and cause him a serious degree of harm as they
have threatened.  I conclude from the background material that the police
would not be able to prevent such an attack and could not offer him
protection and given his record as an ex-convict and the disregard the
police paid to his complaints about the attack in April 2014, I find it
likely that they would not be inclined to assist him."

The judge concluded as follows:

"Given the findings above I conclude that the appellant's appeal under the
Refugee Convention fails as he has failed to show the existence of a
traditional blood feud within the guidance framework of EH (Albania).
Although the matter falls short of such a blood feud I find that the S
family were still seeking revenge in 2015 and would be likely to continue
to seek revenge should the appellant return to Albania.  The experience of
Mr LH indicates that they appear to have the family under effective
surveillance.  In the circumstances the appellant is at risk of serious
harm unless he can avoid it by relocation.  The appellant's family have
tried to escape the S family by moving to a relatively distant town but
this has failed and I find that there is a realistic possibility that were
they and the appellant to move again that they would be tracked down again.
 I also find that the police are unlikely to protect the appellant given
that they dismissed his complaint in 2015.  In the circumstances I conclude
that the appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection and that for the
reasons given above he should not be excluded therefrom because of his own
crime and conviction."

The Grounds of Application

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the
judge had failed to provide adequate reasons on a material matter.  It was
incumbent on her to make findings on the extent of the threat faced by the
claimant which would subsequently feed into any assessment of sufficiency
of protection by the State against S, whom the claimant fears.  At
paragraph 61 the judge said that she had concluded from the background
material that the police would not be able to prevent such an attack but
had not identified what background material she was relying upon.  Nor did
she identify the evidence in relation to her finding that the police would
not assist him. Finally, she  did not refer to the material outlined in the
reasons for refusal letter which concluded that in general a person fearing
non-state actors is likely to be able to obtain effective State protection
although each case must be determined on its own facts.

Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Baker on 22nd February 2019 for
the reasons stated in the grounds.

Mr Diwnycz relied on his grounds and submitted that the decision should be
set aside and remade.

Miss Khan submitted that the decision was adequately reasoned and relied on
the decision in EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348, arguing that
the claimant had already attempted to relocate and had been tracked down.

Consideration as to whether there is a Material Error of Law

I am satisfied that the judge has erred.

The judge specifically found that there was no blood feud under the Kanun
code, the issues specifically addressed in the decision in EH, and indeed
found that the claimant had not established that he himself had ever been
attacked by the S family.  It was therefore incumbent on her to set out in
detail why she considered that the claimant would be at risk on return.
After all, his family, although they moved away from their home village,
did not go very far away.

The judge rejected the claim that the police had conspired to frame the
claimant for burglary. She therefore ought to have addressed the material
submitted by the Secretary of State as set out in the reasons for refusal
letter, which she did not do.  Furthermore, she failed to identify the
background material upon which she relied at paragraph 61 of the
determination, quoted above.

Accordingly, she erred in law and the decision is set aside.

It was agreed between all parties that the decision could be remade on the
basis of further submissions.

Further Submissions

Mr Diwnycz relied on the reasons for refusal letter and the Country
Information and Guidance Report on Albania dated 6th July 2016.  In his
submission, the claimant could expect the police to protect him, for
example if he moved to the capital, Tirana, even if the local police were
unwilling to do so.  In any event, time had moved on and there was no
evidence of any further interest in him following the incident in 2014.

Miss Khan submitted that the grounds of challenge had only addressed the
issue of protection and not the issue of relocation.  There were a number
of positive findings made by the judge, including the fact that the police
were predisposed against him.  In any event, Albania was a small country
and it had been accepted by the judge that the S family had a continuing
interest in the claimant.  At paragraph 53 of the determination she had
said that it was likely that he would not only have to relocate but would
have to go into self-confinement or hiding.

Even if in general terms protection was available, the individual
circumstances had to be addressed.  At paragraph 8.1.1 of the CIG Report,
citing the U.S. State Department Report for 2015 in Albania, stated that
the ombudsman reported that authorities' efforts to protect families or
prevent blood feud killings were insufficient, although the government
increased efforts to prosecute such crimes.  The UN Special Rapporteur had
similarly suggested that the criminal justice system was inefficient and
corrupt.  The U.S. State Department Report dated 27th April 2018 said that
the police did not always enforce the law equitably.  It was likely that
the claimant could be tracked down and the same logic ought to be applied
to him as to persons who were subject to a blood feud.

Findings and Conclusions

Although the grounds of application address the issue of protection, in
order to succeed in this appeal the claimant has to establish that that
protection would not be available to him throughout Albania. I conclude
that the evidence does not do so.

First, the judge rejected the claim that the police did not intervene
following the 2014 attack because of their association with the S family or
indeed for any other reason.

Second, in relation to the events in 2015, the claimant's brother said that
he did not actually call the police because the men left of their own
accord but he was clearly willing to do so which does not indicate a belief
that they would be unwilling to assist him.

Third, the claimant's family remained in the same general area, only moving
to another town some 60 kilometres away, and if they felt that they or
indeed the claimant following his release from prison were in danger, then
they would have relocated much further away.

The general position is that effective State protection is available to
persons fearing non-state actors.  There is no evidence that the S family
have any present interest in the claimant but even if they had, he has not
established that he would be unable to obtain effective State protection
either if he returned to live with his family or if he decided to live in
another city further away.

For this reason, the claimant's appeal must be dismissed.



Decision

The original judge erred in law.  Her decision is set aside.  It is remade
as follows.  The claimant's appeal against the decision to refuse him
protection in the UK is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]
Signed                              Date 8 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

