
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/11171/2018
                                                               PA/10646/2018
                                                               PA/04150/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2019                   |On 13 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                    LAQG
                                    GMMR
                                    EDMF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms M Bayoumi, instructed by Asylum Justice
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants are
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

This decision concerns the consolidated appeals of a family from El
Salvador.  Although the appeals of the first and second appellant were
heard separately in the First-tier Tribunal from that of the third
appellant, all the appeals have been listed together before us, permission
having been granted in the separate appeal proceedings, since the claims
arise out of a common factual matrix and the issues which we have to
decide, as will become clear shortly, impact upon both sets of proceedings.

Background

The first appellant is a citizen of El Salvador who was born on 29 June
1962.  In his appeal, his long-term partner ("BL") is a dependant.

The second appellant is also a citizen of El Salvador who was born on 1
October 1972.  She is the mother of the third appellant, also a citizen of
El Salvador, who was born on 10 June 1992.

The third appellant is married to the daughter ("DD") of the first
appellant and his partner.

The third appellant and DD have a son ("AD") who is also a citizen of El
Salvador.

The appellants' claims arise out of a fear of a gang known as "Barrio 18"
and, in particular, their leader, who is known as "Killer".

They claim that "Killer" became infatuated with DD whilst she was a
schoolgirl.  When his advances were rejected, difficulties with the gang
forced the family to relocate within El Salvador and they remained free
from difficulty for some years.

However, they claim that the gang found out where they had moved and they
experienced a number of incidents which led to them leaving El Salvador.
AD, the child of the third appellant and DD, was kidnapped by the gang
although he was subsequently released.  The third appellant was attacked by
members of the gang at his work and severely beaten.  DD was raped by a
member of the gang, at her workplace, in the presence of her mother and
son.  Whilst he was on a bus, the first appellant, in fear of armed gang
members who came on the bus, was forced to leave.  In another incident, the
first appellant's partner was riding on a bus when it was shot at by men
from a motorbike.  Finally, members of a rival gang ("MS 18") came to the
third appellant's house and put a gun in DD's mouth and told them that they
did not want to see them or their family in the area because of their
involvement with the rival gang Barrio 18.

As a result of these events, the appellants and their family members left
El Salvador.

The third appellant together with DD and AD arrived in the United Kingdom
on 15 November 2017 and the third appellant claimed asylum.

The first appellant, his partner and the second appellant came to the UK on
28 February 2018 and claimed asylum.

The third appellant's claim (together with those of DD and AD as his
dependants) was refused by the Secretary of State on 7 March 2018.

The claims of the first appellant (and his dependent partner) were refused
by the Secretary of State on 10 August 2018 and the claim of the second
appellant was refused on 4 August 2018.

The Appeals

The appeal of the third appellant was heard first by the First-tier
Tribunal on 24 July 2018.  In a determination promulgated on 7 August 2018,
Judge Trevaskis dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  He made an adverse
credibility finding and rejected the third appellant's claim that he was at
risk on return to El Salvador from gang members.

Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal (DJ Peart) on 5
September 2018.  Initially permission was also refused by the Upper
Tribunal (UTJ Coker) on 5 April 2019.  However, subsequently UTJ Coker
reconsidered her decision on the basis that, due to a procedural error,
further and additional grounds submitted by the third appellant had not
been made available to her when she refused permission.  Having set aside
her earlier decision, on 6 August 2019 UTJ Coker granted the third
appellant permission to appeal.

The appeals of the first appellant (together with his partner as dependant)
and the second appellant were separately listed and heard by the First-tier
Tribunal on 11 February 2019.  In a decision sent on 11 March 2019, Judge
Solly dismissed their appeals on all grounds.  Before Judge Solly, the
Secretary of State relied upon the adverse findings of Judge Trevaskis in
the appeal of the third appellant.  Judge Solly also made adverse
credibility findings and dismissed the appeals of the first appellant (and
that of his partner as dependant) and the second appellant.

On 7 May 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Haria) granted the first and
second appellants permission to appeal.

The appeals of the first and second appellants was initially listed before
the Upper Tribunal in July 2019.  However, at the hearing before DUTJ
Phillips he was told that the application had been made to the Upper
Tribunal for UTJ Coker to reconsider her refusal of permission on 5 April
2019.  As that appeal was closely allied to the appeal of the first and
second appellants, DUTJ Phillips adjourned the appeal of the first and
second appellants so that, if permission were granted to the first
appellant to appeal, all the appeals could be considered together by the
UT.

In the event, as we have pointed out, UTJ Coker did reverse her decision
and granted the third appellant permission to appeal on 6 August 2019.

As a result, the appeals of all the appellants were listed before us on 17
October 2019.

At the outset of the hearing, Mr Howells accepted that if the decision of
Judge Trevaskis was set aside, so should the decision of Judge Solly as she
had taken into account, applying Devaseelan, his adverse credibility
findings.  He conceded that if Judge Trevaskis' adverse credibility
findings were flawed in law, the appeals of all three appellants should be
reheard in the First-tier Tribunal de novo.

As a consequence, we heard submissions focussed upon the appellants'
challenge to Judge Trevaskis' decision.  At the conclusion of the parties'
respective submissions, and having taken time to consider those
submissions, we indicated that Judge Trevaskis' decision was legally flawed
and could not stand.

As a result of Mr Howells's concession, it was unnecessary to hear any
submissions in relation to Judge Solly's decision, which could not, in the
light of our conclusion in respect of Judge Trevaskis' decision, stand.

At the conclusion of the hearing, we indicated that the decisions of both
Judges Trevaskis and Solly were set aside and the appeals would be remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal in order to remake the decisions in respect of
all three appellants at a consolidated hearing.

We now give our reasons for our conclusions.

The Submissions

Ms Bayoumi relied upon two sets of grounds of appeal at pages 241 - 247 and
266 - 270 of the consolidated bundle in respect of the third appellant.  In
particular, she relied upon the latter "supplemental grounds of appeal".

First, Ms Bayoumi submitted that the judge had fallen into error in [59]
when he had stated that there was not "any medical evidence corroborating
injuries suffered by the [third] appellant or [his wife]".  She submitted
that there were copies of the medical records of the third appellant and
his wife, DD, which, as set out in para 10 of the "supplemental grounds of
appeal", set out the claim and, consistent with that claim, supporting
medical conditions of both the third appellant and DD.

In response, Mr Howells submitted that the medical reports did not provide
medical evidence "corroborating" the claimed injuries.  The evidence was
simply of what the third appellant and his wife told their GP.  He
submitted that the reasoning of Judge Trevaskis, in particular at para
[60], was that the third appellant had not mentioned a number of the
incidents in his screening interview.  What he had said to the GP postdated
that.  Mr Howells pointed out that the screening interview was on 15
November 2017 and the date of the earliest medical record was 24 November
2017.

In response, Ms Bayoumi submitted that it was speculative that that was all
that Judge Trevaskis had in mind in [59], namely that there was nothing in
the medical records to corroborate the "injuries" as opposed to the third
appellant's claim.  She submitted that there needed to be a holistic
assessment including taking into account the evidence of the third
appellant and DD as given to the GP.  Consistency was, she submitted, an
important aspect of assessing credibility.

Secondly, Ms Bayoumi submitted that the judge had failed to take into
account the background evidence concerning gang violence in El Salvador to
which he had been referred by the third appellant's (then) Counsel.

In response, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had stated at [43] that he
had had regard to "all of the evidence contained in the bundles".  Mr
Howells pointed out that at [62] the judge had referred to the "background
information about San Salvador" in finding an aspect of the third
appellant's account plausible.  He submitted it was not correct, therefore,
that the judge had not considered the background evidence.

Thirdly, Ms Bayoumi submitted that the judge had made a number of factual
errors concerning the evidence in his determination.  In particular, she
relied upon the following.  First, at [11] the judge had been wrong to say
that the third appellant's wife (DD) had been "raped at her salon by two
members of Barrio 18".  Her evidence was that she had been raped by the
gang leader and the incident had been watched by two other gang members.
Secondly, in relation to the attack upon the bus when shots were fired from
a passing motorbike, the judge had been wrong at [11] to state that the
third appellant's wife and her mother had been "shot at by members of
Barrio 18" and that at [31] the judge took into account that the third
appellant had been unable to give details of the motorbike attack on his
wife.  However, it had not been the evidence before the judge that the
appellant's wife had been on the bus.  Rather, her parents and his mother
(the second appellant) had been on the bus when it was attacked.  Further,
at [60], the judge criticised the third appellant for not mentioning this
attack, together with a number of other incidents, in his screening
interview, which damaged his credibility.

In response, Mr Howells accepted that there was some confusion in Judge
Trevaskis' understanding of the 'motorbike incident'.  He also accepted
that the judge had made an error at [11] in relation to the detail of the
sexual violence against the third appellant's wife, DD.  As regards the
latter, Mr Howells submitted it was not material as the judge had not taken
this into account in assessing the third appellant's credibility.  As
regards the 'motorbike incident', Mr Howells submitted that it remained the
case that the third appellant had not mentioned that incident, together
with a number of other significant incidents, in his screening interview
and the judge was entitled to take that into account at [60] in reaching
his adverse credibility finding.

When we raised the point with him, Mr Howells accepted that the judge in
[63] had been wrong to doubt the appellant's account of when he was on a
bus and it was boarded by two gang members and his evidence that his fear
was based upon "instinct alone".  Mr Howells accepted that the third
appellant's evidence was that he had seen armed individuals board the bus
and that, therefore, the judge's reasoning that, in effect, the appellant's
account that he would leave the bus (together with others) in fear was
implausible.

Discussion

Judge Trevaskis' reasoning, that led him to reach his adverse credibility
finding, is set out at [59] - [64] as follows:

"59. I have considered the inconsistencies identified by the respondent in
the reasons for refusal, and the explanations offered by the appellant.  In
the absence of any record of reports of the alleged incidents to the
authorities, or any medical evidence corroborating injuries suffered by the
appellant or his wife, or any statements from other family members,
credibility of the claims can only be assessed on the basis of the accounts
given by the appellant and his wife at the various stages of the claim,
namely screening interview, asylum interview and appeal hearing.

60.  It is a common argument that the structure of the screening interview
is such that a detailed account is at best unwanted and at worst
discouraged.  The appellant said that he did not mention the kidnap of his
child because he was told to explain why he could not return; he did not
mention being beaten because there was not enough time; he did not mention
the attack by men on a motorbike because he had not been present; he did
not mention that his wife had been threatened and a gun put in her mouth,
nor that she had been raped, because he did not know those details at the
time of his screening interview.  These details constitute a significant
proportion of the narrative of the appellant's claims, and, because of that
and because of the seriousness of the incidents themselves, I do not
consider that the explanation offered by the appellant for the omission of
these details at his first opportunity to explain his reasons for flight is
sufficient to satisfy me the required standard as to the credibility of
those claims.

61.  He was asked in his screening interview whether he or his wife had any
association with gang members, and said no.  He explains that he did not
consider what happened to his wife to constitute an 'association'.  I am
prepared to accept that that misunderstanding would explain the apparent
inconsistency.

62.  The appellant stated that, after the kidnap of his son, when he was
reunited with his wife, son and mother-in-law, he decided to send them home
in a taxi, rather than taking them himself, because he feared losing his
job.  He also suggested that taxis were a safer means of transport than
buses.  Having regard to the background information about San Salvador, I
am prepared to accept that this is a plausible explanation for that course
of action.  Presumably, travel by taxi would have been faster than by bus,
and would have reduced their exposure to contact with other people.

63.  The account given by the appellant of the attacks upon him at work and
on a bus were also considered to be lacking in consistency.  Despite
claiming to have suffered significant injuries in the attack at work, he
did not seek medical treatment.  With regard to the incident on the bus,
there was no contact between him and his alleged assailants, and he based
his fear of them upon instinct alone.  I am not satisfied to the required
standard that the appellant has provided a credible account of either of
these alleged incidents.

64.  Taking the account by the appellant in the round, and having regard to
the above findings as to consistency and general credibility, I am not
satisfied to the required standard that the appellant has established a
credible subjective basis for fear of treatment amounting to persecution."

As will be clear from these paragraphs, only [59], [60] and [63] consist of
reasons supporting an adverse credibility finding.  By contrast, in [61]
the judge accepted the "apparent inconsistency" and rejected the point
relied upon by the Secretary of State.  Likewise, in [62] the judge
accepted that the appellant had provided a credible account of a number of
matters relied upon by the Secretary of State.

First, whilst we see some merit in Mr Howells' submission that the medical
records do not, in themselves, provide corroborating evidence of the third
appellant's and DD's "injuries", the medical records do contain evidence
from the third appellant and DD as to what they claimed happened to them
(and their family) in El Salvador.  That was relevant evidence, at least of
consistency subsequent to the screening interview.  The judge was wrong not
to take that into account, particularly given that the 'heavy lifting' in
his reasoning is at [59] - [60], that the third appellant had not mentioned
significant incidents relevant to the claim at his screening interview on
15 November 2017, shortly before the earliest of the medical records,
which, we were told by Mr Howells, was 24 November 2017.

Secondly, we have no doubt that the judge placed an unreasonable weight
upon the fact that the third appellant had not mentioned the matter set out
in [60] at his screening interview.  We were told by Mr Howells that the
screening interview, which took place at the airport on arrival, lasted 45
minutes.  As the judge pointed out in [60], a screening interview is not
the place for an individual to give a "detailed account" which, he
recognised, is "at best unwanted and at worst discouraged".  Nevertheless,
the judge went on to take into account details in the third appellant's
claim which were not mentioned at the screening interview.

Given the nature of a screening interview, caution must be exercised in
counting against an appellant a failure to refer to a "detail" of an
account rather than, perhaps, a fundamental basis of a claim - for example,
stating a claim is based upon political opinion when subsequently the
individual relies on other distinct reasons such as sexual orientation or
religious beliefs (see R v SSHD ex p Agbonmenio [1996] Imm AR 69).

In JA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 450, Moore-Bick LJ (with whom
Gloster and Vos LJJ agreed) made this general point at [25]: a Tribunal
must

         "consider with care the extent to which reliance can properly be
         placed on answers given by the appellant in his initial and
         screening interviews".

Here, in our judgment, the judge placed excessive and unreasonable weight
upon the matters referred to in [60] as not being referred to in the third
appellant's initial 45 minutes screening interview held shortly after he
arrived at the airport.

In truth, apart from the matters referred to in [63], this was the only
basis upon which the judge found the appellant's account not to be
credible.  Mr Howells accepted that one of the reasons given by the judge
in [63] is not sustainable, namely that it was, in effect, implausible that
the third appellant would leave the bus when it was boarded by two
individuals because he was in fear based upon his "instinct alone".  As we
explored at the hearing, the third appellant's evidence was that he
witnessed two armed men boarding the bus and he and others left as a
result.  We agree with Mr Howells that that reasoning in [63] is
unsustainable in law.

Whilst Mr Howells may well be correct that the judge's mistaken
understanding of the incident when it is claimed that the third appellant's
wife (DD) was raped as set out in [11] was not material to his findings,
when taken with his clear misunderstanding as to the incident when the
third appellant's parents and mother-in-law were in a bus that was shot at
from a motorbike, our confidence in the judge's grasp of the evidence is
necessarily diminished.

In addition, we are left in some doubt as to what the judge meant when he
accepted the "inconsistencies identified by the respondent in the reasons
for refusal" (at [59]) when he subsequently relied, almost entirely, upon
the third appellant's omission to mention certain details of the claim in
the screening interview and rejected reliance upon certain inconsistencies
that had been relied upon by the Secretary of State (see [61]).  What, if
any, other inconsistencies informed the bedrock of the judge's adverse
finding are not possible to identify.

It is clear to us that the third appellant's claim (set in the context of
the claims by the family as a whole) was a factually complex one.  The
judge's reasons at [59] - [64], so far as they are directed to his adverse
credible finding, are sparingly brief.  For the reasons we have given,
essentially accepting the substance of Ms Bayoumi's first and third
submissions, we are satisfied that the judge's decision was legally flawed
and cannot, as a consequence, stand.  It is unnecessary to express any
concluded view on her second submission other than to say, in our view, we
place no reliance on it in reaching a decision on the proper disposal of
these appeals.

The appeal of the third appellant must, as a consequence, be remitted to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing.

As we have already indicated, if that was our conclusion, Mr Howells
conceded that Judge Solly's decision dismissing the appeals of the first
and second appellants also could not stand because she had taken Judge
Trevaskis' findings as a 'starting point' applying Devaseelan.

Accordingly, the decision of Judge Solly to dismiss the appeals of the
first and second appellants cannot stand and must, likewise, be remitted to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing.

Decision

The decision of Judge Trevaskis to dismiss the third appellant's appeal
involved the making of an error of law and is set aside.

The decision of Judge Solly to dismiss the appeals of the first and second
appellants involved the making of an error of law and is set aside.

The appeals of all three appellants are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
in order to be remade de novo.  Those appeals should be consolidated and
heard by a single judge other than Judges Trevaskis and Solly.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            12 November 2019


