
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11488/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 July 2019                                |On 3 February 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A-A-E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Patry, Counsel instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Action
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 we make an order prohibiting the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Respondent
(also the "Claimant). Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of
court. We make this order because the Claimant is an asylum seeker  and  so
is entitled to privacy.

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  decision  of  a
panel of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  of  the  Respondent,
hereinafter the "Claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of State on
24 October 2017 refusing her claim for leave to remain on asylum grounds.

3. The claimant is a national of Iraq.  She was born in 1992 and  left  Iraq
in 2001 with her family to reside in Turkey.  She  arrived  in  the  United
Kingdom on 31 December 2007 accompanied by her mother and  younger  sisters
to join her father who was already  there.  The  Claimant  was  given  four
years' discretionary leave which expired on 11 May 2014.  An attempt  at  a
timely application for further leave failed because  there  was  a  problem
with paying the required fee but the Claimant made a valid application on 2
June 2014.

4. However, the Claimant has committed  criminal  offences  leading  to  her
being sentenced to 42 months' imprisonment on 11 June 2015.  The  Secretary
of State made a decision to deport her pursuant to Section 32(5) of the  UK
Borders Act 2007 on 21 January 2016 and the Claimant responded by making  a
protection and human rights claim. She expressed fear of returning to  Iraq
and particularly the area surrounding Mosul where she had lived as a child.
 She also relied on the possible consequences of  her  convictions  in  the
United  Kingdom  becoming  known  to  others  to  support  her  claim   for
protection.

5. The Secretary of State warned  her  that  it  may  be  the  Secretary  of
State's view that the Claimant could not resist refoulement under the terms
of the Refugee Convention.

6. On 24 November 2017 her  application  for  asylum  was  refused  but  the
Secretary of State accepted that she could not be returned safely  to  Iraq
and granted her Restricted Leave. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and
then to the Upper Tribunal concerns her claim to be a refugee and  entitled
to protection against removal.

7. The Claimant has committed offences under the Terrorism  Act  2000.  Such
offences are emotive and it  is  perhaps  particularly  important  that  we
remind ourselves that we are not,  at  least  initially,  primary  decision
makers.  Our function is to see if the Secretary of State is able  to  show
that the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the appeal  was  wrong  in
law.  We must be careful to apply our minds dispassionately and clearly  to
areas of law that might be thought technical and, given  their  importance,
might be thought surprisingly unclear.

8. Broadly there are two ways in which a person who  might  otherwise  be  a
protected  refugee  under  the  Refugee  Convention  cannot  rely  on   the
protection of that Convention.

9. One way is where a person's misconduct has taken them out  of  the  scope
of the protection of the Convention.  Article 1F(c) of the 1951  Convention
relating to the Status  of  Refugees  is  particularly  important  in  this
appeal. We set out below the provision, in its  English  form,  of  all  of
Article 1F to give context to Article 1F(c). It states that:

  "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person  with
  respect to whom there are serious grounds for considering that:

  (a)         he has committed a crime against peace, a  war  crime,  or  a
  crime  against  humanity,  as          defined   in   the   international
  instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of        such crimes;

  (b)         he has committed a serious non-political  crime  outside  the
  country of refuge prior to        his  admission  to  the  country  as  a
  refugee;

  (c)         he has been guilty of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
  principles of the United              Nations".

10. Additionally a person who is not a person excluded  from  the  scope  of
protection  of  the  Convention  by  Article  1F  may  still  be  refouled,
notwithstanding being within the scope  of  protection  where  Article  33,
entitled "Prohibition of expulsion or return (refoulement)" applies.

11. Article 33(2) states:

  "The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be claimed  by  a
  refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for regarding as  a  danger  to
  the security of the country in which he is, or who, having been convicted
  by a final judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger
  to the community of that country".

12. In the law of the United Kingdom (in all its jurisdictions)  the  proper
operation of Article 33(2) is illuminated by Section 72 of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  It  creates  presumption  that  can  be
rebutted. Section 72(2) provides:

  "A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a final judgment of
  a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to the  community
  of the United Kingdom if he is -

    (a)   convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

    (b)   sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years".

13. The First-tier Tribunal explained its reasoning in some care.

14. At paragraph 200 it concluded unequivocally that the  Claimant  had  not
committed a "particularly serious crime".  She had rebutted  the  statutory
presumption to the contrary raised by Section 72 of the 2002 Act.

15. At paragraph 213 it concluded that the Claimant was  not  a  "danger  to
the community  of  the  United  Kingdom".   Again,  she  had  rebutted  the
statutory presumption raised by Section 72.

16. It follows that, on the First-tier Tribunal's findings, if the  Claimant
is entitled to the protection of the Convention she  is  protected  against
refoulement.

17. In reaching this  conclusion  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  regard  to
Section 54(1) of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   This
does not purport to define the  scope  of  Article  1F(c)  of  the  Refugee
Convention but does identify the conduct that will be included.  We set out
below its full terms:

  "In the construction and application of  Article  1F(c)  of  the  Refugee
  Convention the reference to acts contrary to the purposes and  principles
  of the United Nations shall be taken as including, in particular -

    (a)   acts of committing, preparing or instigating terrorism (whether or
    not the            acts amount to an actual or inchoate offence), and

    (b)   acts of encouraging or  inducing  others  to  commit,  prepare  or
    instigate               terrorism (whether or not the acts amount to  an
    actual or inchoate offence)".

18. The First-tier Tribunal's approach to  Article  1F  was  illuminated  by
Section 54(1)(b) of the 2006 Act, the decision of the Supreme Court in  Al-
Sirri (FC) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 54, the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in
Youssef v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 933 and also Resolution 2178 of  the  United
Nations Security Council passed in September 2014.  The relevant  terms  of
that Resolution are set out by the Court  of  Appeal  in  the  decision  in
Youssef.

19. The First-tier Tribunal when  considering  Article  1F(c)  distinguished
between the quality of the bad behaviour complained of,  which  the  First-
tier Tribunal accepted was of a kind that could exclude the  claimant  from
the scope of protection under  the  Convention,  and  the  gravity  of  the
offence which the Tribunal concluded was not of a sufficiently  high  level
to warrant exclusion.

20. We consider now the conduct  complained  of.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
made clear findings about the claimant's offending beginning  at  paragraph
110.

21. It is a matter of record that she was convicted  on  her  confession  of
two offences under the Terrorism Act  2006  which  were  punished  with  42
months' imprisonment.  There was little evidence about  the  offences  from
either party before the First-tier Tribunal but there was  a  copy  of  the
sentencing remarks of HH Judge Wide QC which are set out in detail  in  its
Decision and Reasons.

22. We are disappointed that we have not been able to find  a  copy  of  the
indictment in the papers before us.  This is a case where the nature rather
than merely the fact of the claimant's  criminality  is  important  and  we
would have preferred to have seen precisely how the offence was  identified
and presented to a court.  Nevertheless, the opening remarks  of  HH  Judge
Wide QC are helpful. He said:

  "You pleaded guilty to a count of encouraging terrorism and a  count  for
  dissemination of terrorist publication".

23. It was also clear that the Claimant accepted that she had committed  the
offences with intent to encourage others to commit acts of terrorism rather
than committing the offences recklessly.

24. At paragraph 115 the First-tier  Tribunal  quoted  from  the  sentencing
remarks at paragraph 46H to 47D which said:

  "The material that you were disseminating encouraged young men to  go  to
  fight ... Furthermore, to encourage women  to  go  to  support  them  and
  indeed to bring up their children in the belief that it is their duty  to
  take  up  arms,  to  wage  violent  Jihad  and  embrace  martyrdom.   And
  furthermore, to encourage mothers to be proud of their sons  who  die  as
  martyrs.  The material included gruesome images of corpses and  prisoners
  about to be beheaded".

25. The Tribunal then confirmed that the material was "avowedly  pro-Islamic
State in nature".  It also described the material as  "particularly  vile".
It is also right to say that the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
claimant did not herself commit or intend to commit any acts  of  terrorism
or do anything of a practical  nature  and  none  of  the  material  posted
included the provision of any practical assistance to others.

26. The Tribunal also accepted that the "vast majority" of  material  posted
was not created by the Claimant.  She was "re-tweeting" content  originally
posted by others.  It had never been the Secretary  of  State's  case  that
anyone undertook any specific act of terror at the Claimant's behest or  as
a result of reading the material that she had posted.

27. There were also clear findings about the "scale of  dissemination"  (see
paragraph 121).  The sentencing judge had referred to this as "massive" but
that is a subjective observation.  The First-tier Tribunal  found  that  it
averaged: "at most 50 Tweets a day over  the  course  of  347  days".   The
Tribunal then noted that this comes to a total of 17,350 Tweets.  There was
a dispute about how many people  followed  the  Claimant.   The  figure  of
85,000 had been stated in the pre-sentence report but the lower  figure  of
8,500 appeared elsewhere and before the First-tier Tribunal Ms  Patry  (for
the Secretary of State) accepted the lower figure for the purposes  of  the
appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal speculated that the Crown Court Judge  may
have worked from the wrong figure but if there  was  a  material  error  in
sentencing it could be addressed in the appropriate forum and that  is  not
the First-tier Tribunal.

28. The Tribunal also found that the Claimant, at  the  time  of  committing
the offences. did "hold what can properly be described as extremist views".

29. There was no evidence about the extent of "re-tweeting".   The  Tribunal
noted that it had "no information as to the nature, profile,  or  potential
social medial following of anyone among the 8,500".

30. At paragraph 129 the First-tier Tribunal said:

  "On the basis of what is said by HHJ Wide, QC, at 46G we  find  that  the
  [Claimant's] Twitter account did in fact appear on a website 'associated'
  with Al Qaeda, and that it was in a list of what were described as 'sixty-
  six important Jihadist accounts'.  What we are unable to do is  make  any
  further findings of fact relating  to:  the  nature  of  the  association
  between the website in question and Al Qaeda; the particular  content  of
  the website  itself;  whether,  for  example,  the  list  containing  the
  [Claimant's] account only ran from 1 to 66, or whether the list had  been
  selected on the basis of content or the number of followers, or perceived
  influence (as opposed to sheer volume of  postings).   Our  inability  is
  based on the absence of evidence from the Respondent".

31. In determining the application of Appendix 1F  the  Tribunal  recognised
particularly  three  authorities.   First  there  is  Section  54  of   the
Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, then there is the decision of
the Supreme Court in Al-Sirri v SSHD  [2012]  UKSC  54  and  there  is  the
decision of the Court of Appeal in Youssef v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 933.   It
is right to emphasise that the  operation  of  Section  54  was  considered
expressly in Al-Sirri and Youssef, being a decision of the Court of Appeal,
was bound by and followed the decision in Al-Sirri.

32. Nevertheless, we look closely at the  decision  in  Youssef  because  it
guides the Tribunal's approach.  The Court of Appeal in Youssef  emphasised
that there was a "high threshold defined in terms of gravity" and  remitted
the decision  to  dismiss  Youssef's  appeal  because  the  Court  was  not
satisfied that the Upper Tribunal had appreciated the need for gravity.

33. The Court of Appeal clearly followed Al-Sirri (as it was bound  to  do),
after noting that although Resolution 2178 (which expressed  grave  concern
about the growing threat posed by foreign  terrorist  fighters)  post-dated
the decision in Al-Sirri the need for conduct to cross a  "high  threshold"
necessary before someone could be  taken  outside  the  protection  of  the
Convention was not diminished.

34. It is appropriate to set out Irwin L.J.'s summary  of  resolution  2178.
He said at paragraph 41:

  Finally, on 24 September 2014 the Security Council passed Resolution 2178
  (2014), which inter alia recorded the Security Council as:

  "Expressing grave concern over the acute  and  growing  threat  posed  by
  foreign terrorist fighters, namely individuals  who  travel  to  a  State
  other than their States of residence or nationality for  the  purpose  of
  the perpetration, planning,  or  preparation  of,  or  participation  in,
  terrorist acts or the  providing  or  receiving  of  terrorist  training,
  including in connection with armed conflict,  and  resolving  to  address
  this threat, ...

  Expressing concern  over  the  increased  use  by  terrorists  and  their
  supporters of communications technology for the purpose  of  radicalizing
  to terrorism, recruiting and inciting others to  commit  terrorist  acts,
  including through the internet, and financing and facilitating the travel
  and subsequent activities of foreign terrorist fighters, and  underlining
  the need for Member States to act  cooperatively  to  prevent  terrorists
  from  exploiting  technology,  communications  and  resources  to  incite
  support for terrorist acts, while respecting human rights and fundamental
  freedoms and in compliance with  other  obligations  under  international
  law, ...

  Calling upon States to ensure, in conformity with international  law,  in
  particular international human rights law and international refugee  law,
  that refugee status is not abused  by  the  perpetrators,  organizers  or
  facilitators of terrorist acts, including by foreign terrorist fighters,"

35. Here the First-tier Tribunal found that the  Claimant  was  entitled  to
the protection of the Refugee Convention.

36. We set out below paragraphs 238 and 239  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision where their findings and reasons on this point are summarised:

  "238.  We have asked ourselves the question of whether there is  anything
  more to the  circumstances  surrounding  the  [Claimant's]  actions.   By
  'more' we mean additional factors sufficient, alone or in combination, to
  meet the high threshold.  For the reasons set out above, we conclude that
  whilst there are certain additional factors in this  case,  most  notably
  (but not exclusively) the inclusion in a list on a website and the volume
  of posts made during the offending period,  these  are  not  sufficiently
  strong, alone or in combination, for the respondent to be  able  to  show
  that the high threshold in relation to gravity and impact has been met.

  239.   Finally, we conclude that the  simple  fact  of  the  [Claimant's]
  convictions under domestic law is not sufficient for  the  [Secretary  of
  State] to be able to reach the relevant threshold.  Whilst we have placed
  appropriate weight upon the sentencing remarks of  HHJ  Wide,  QC,  these
  alone  or  in  combination  with  other  matters  do  not   represent   a
  sufficiently robust basis for concluding that Article  1F(c)  applies  to
  the [Claimant].  Similarly, the combination of the  statutory  definition
  in Section 54 of the 2006 Act and the  very  real  concerns  set  out  in
  Resolution 2178 does not raise the [Secretary of  State's]  case  against
  the [Claimant] up to a level where the particular facts of the  case  are
  of little consequence, or at least do not carry the same significance  as
  they otherwise might".

37. The conclusion that  the  Claimant  was  no  longer  a  "danger  to  the
community" is based on several  findings  not  the  least  being  that  the
Claimant does not hold extremist views now and has not held such views  for
"a significant period of time following the offending".

38. The Tribunal noted that  the  finding  in  the  OASys  Report  that  the
Claimant presented a "medium risk of serious harm to the public" had to  be
put in the context of that risk existing but of the Claimant being unlikely
to cause any harm "unless there is a change of circumstance, for example, a
failure to take medication, loss of accommodation, relationship  breakdown,
drug or alcohol misuse" and there was no reason to find such things at  all
likely to happen.  The Claimant was subject to stringent licence conditions
with which she had complied and was given support  and  treatment  for  the
conditions that promoted social isolation.

39. The Tribunal also found that the Claimant had not been  convicted  of  a
"particularly serious crime".

40. There are often  difficulties  with  the  meaning  of  this  phrase  for
reasons that will be obvious to any lawyer.  Firstly  the  phrase  "serious
crime", a phrase which is itself imprecise,  is  qualified  with  the  word
"particularly" which means it has to be in a category of serious crime that
distinguishes it in some way from others.  This difficulty is compounded by
the statutory presumption to the effect  that  a  person  has  committed  a
"particularly serious crime" if it  attracted  a  sentence  of  two  years'
imprisonment or more.  Whilst there are occasional examples of very serious
crimes indeed being punished with less severe sanctions they are  in  their
nature most unusual.  Without being disrespectful to anyone, and  certainly
not Parliament, we find that most lawyers would instinctively think that  a
"particularly serious crime" would attract a sentence of rather  more  than
two years' imprisonment.

41. We begin by seeing how these findings are challenged  by  the  Secretary
of State.  The grounds of appeal are sensibly and helpfully short.

42. The first challenge  is  to  the  decision  that  the  claimant  is  not
excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention.

43. The grounds contend, correctly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
that the convictions were of a kind  that  could  lead  to  exclusion  from
protection but it was necessary to find  not  only  that  they  were  of  a
suitable kind but that they were of a sufficiently high level  of  gravity.
According to the grounds the Tribunal had found  that  the  acts  could  be
committed  recklessly  rather  than  intentionally  and  still  achieve   a
sufficient level of gravity but, according to the Secretary of  State,  the
Tribunal erred in concluding that  the  acts  committed  did  not  reach  a
sufficient level of gravity.  The Secretary of State said that this finding
was based on an unlawful rejection of the finding of the  sentencing  judge
that the claimant had "re-tweeted jihadist material on a  'massive  scale',
that she had been included on a website of important jihadist accounts  and
that she had intended her acts".  Criticism is  made  that  the  First-tier
Tribunal "appears to have focused almost exclusively on the consequences of
the tweeting, rather than the fact that the acts in and of themselves  were
of sufficient gravity.  This amounts to an error of law".

44. This was supplemented by a  skeleton  argument  from  the  Secretary  of
State signed by Ms  Patry  dated  25  June  2019.   The  skeleton  argument
analyses the findings leading to ground 1.  The grounds refer  to  guidance
given by Irwin LJ in Youssef at paragraph 85 where the learned Lord Justice
said:

  "It is easy to conceive of an immature 18 year old going online from  his
  suburban bedroom,  and  using  the  most  lurid  terms,  in  calling  for
  international jihad.  The nature and quality of this would, it  seems  to
  me, satisfy the requirements of Article 1F(c).  It would represent active
  encouragement or incitement of international terror.  However,  it  would
  be unlikely, without more, to be grave enough in its  impact  to  satisfy
  the approach laid down  in  Al-Sirri.   That  might  well  require  more:
  evidence of wide international readership, of large-scale  repetition  or
  re-tweeting, or citation by  those  who  were  moved  to  join  an  armed
  struggle, for example".

45. The skeleton argument then  picks  up  on  the  decision  of  the  Upper
Tribunal in Youssef when it re-made the decision as directed by  the  Court
of  Appeal  and  again  dismissed  the  appeal.   This  is  Appeal  Number:
AA/11292/2012 and the decision was promulgated on 8  March  2019.   It  was
drawn to our attention after proper notice had been given.   The  arguments
used by the Upper Tribunal  then  were  drawn  to  our  attention  and  the
implication is that we were encouraged to follow them.  The Upper  Tribunal
looked at the requirement for "impact" or gravity and said at paragraph 34:

  "It clearly follows on from what is said at  paragraph  16  in  Al-Sirri,
  itself borrowing from UNHCR's background note on the application  of  the
  exclusion clauses (4 September  2003)  at  paragraph  47  that  the  high
  threshold is to be defined  in  terms  of  the  gravity  of  the  act  in
  question, the manner in which the act  is  organised,  its  international
  impact and long term objectives and the  implications  for  international
  peace and security.  It is in that sense  that  we  understand  the  term
  'impact' to be used by the Court of Appeal ... There does not have to  be
  shown any offence committed or attempted as  a  consequence  of  anything
  said or done by the appellant".

46. The skeleton argument points out the  Upper  Tribunal  looked  at  other
factors that would be relevant to gravity including holding  out  to  be  a
scholar, using the internet, the length of time in which  incitements  were
made and the number of hits on the website and on the facts  of  that  case
decided that the acts were sufficient.

47. The skeleton argument then contrasted that approach  with  the  findings
in the present case  on  the  issue  of  gravity.   The  skeleton  argument
challenges  the  Tribunal's  finding  that  Irwin  LJ  "appeared  to   have
concluded" that the volume of tweeting does not necessarily equate to  acts
being sufficiently grave.   The skeleton argument contends that is not what
Irwin LJ said.  His example of a  teenager  calling  for  jihad  in  "lurid
terms" did not deal with quantities of tweets.  The skeleton argument  also
says that more weight should have been given to the volume of  the  tweets.
The Tribunal's decision to give weight to the fact there was no evidence of
re-tweeting was wrong.  The Tribunal had decided there was no  causal  link
required and so should not have been concerned with re-tweeting.  The  fact
that the claimant's  account  was  amongst  the  list  of  sixty  six  most
important Twitter accounts was written off  for  no  particular  reason  as
insufficiently strong.

48. The Tribunal is then criticised for apparently stepping  away  from  the
sentencing judge's observation  that  "dissemination  of  material  was  an
important factor in the encouragement of young  men  and  women  to  travel
abroad and engage in acts of terrorism" even though there was  no  evidence
that anybody had done that.  The grounds say that more regard  should  have
been given to the sentencing judge having made findings about  the  gravity
and severity of the acts.  The core complaint is that the  Tribunal  looked
for evidence of anyone taking any notice and the skeleton argument contends
that that is not necessary and more regard should have been  given  to  the
sentencing judge's use of the phrase "massive scale".

49. Mr Mackenzie produced a reply and skeleton argument in  the  form  of  a
Rule 24 notice.  This  is,  with  respect,  an  entirely  sensible  way  of
producing a skeleton argument and we  are  grateful  to  both  Counsel  for
producing skeleton arguments which are apposite and not indulgently long.

50. This asserts that the Tribunal did not go behind  the  sentencing  judge
but the sentencing judge had a different task.  When he was  assessing  the
appropriate punishment he did not necessarily have in mind whether the acts
were "contrary to the  purposes  and  principles  of  the  United  Nations"
because that was not part of the sentencing  exercise.   The  Tribunal  was
right to note that the use of the  word  "massive"  was  a  subjective  and
imprecise term.  The sentencing remarks were clearly in  the  mind  of  the
First-tier Tribunal.  According to Mr Mackenzie the First-tier Tribunal did
its job by applying the relevant test.  At  paragraph  11(c)  the  Rule  24
notice asserts:

  "Saying so does not involve rejecting what the  judge  found:  it  merely
  highlights the difficulty which the SSHD inevitably encountered in opting
  to rely almost exclusively on remarks made in a different legal  context,
  in circumstances where the original material could and should  have  been
  put before the Ft-T".

51. It said the First-tier Tribunal should not be  criticised  for  stating,
correctly, that it could  not  make  further  findings  about  the  Twitter
account appearing on a website "associated" with Al Qaeda because there was
no further evidence before  the  Tribunal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was
perfectly aware that the Claimant had admitted her guilt on  the  basis  of
intent even if that was not her initial position.

52. Mr Mackenzie argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  right  to  have
regard to the observations of Irwin LJ that "for the reasons given  by  the
Supreme Court in Al-Sirri, that  careful  consideration  be  given  to  the
gravity or impact of any acts relied on".

53. The First-tier Tribunal,  rightly,  had  commented  that  there  was  no
evidence that anyone was  influenced  by  the  conduct  complained  of,  no
evidence of  anyone  approving  of  her  conduct,  no  evidence  of  anyone
following her who had committed any terrorist offence or been motivated  to
join an armed group and no evidence whether "any follower of the [Claimant]
had in fact travelled abroad to engage in acts of terrorism".  The Tribunal
was right to say "the absence of such  evidence  is  of  relevance  to  our
assessment of gravity".

54. In short, he contended that the facts of themselves  did  not  establish
the high threshold had  been  reached.  The  Secretary  of  State  had  not
discharged the burden and it is not the job of the Tribunal  to  guess  and
assume.

55. We have considered the written and oral submissions but  it  comes  down
to this.  It is the Secretary of State's contention that the  Tribunal  was
not entitled to find on the evidence before it that the high threshold  had
not been reached.  The  parties  agree  that  the  Claimant  has  committed
terrorist offences and that she has been involved  in  tweeting  profoundly
unpleasant material.   There is some disagreement about the extent  of  its
circulation but on anybody's version it has gone to  thousands  of  people.
There is no evidence that anybody has taken any direct  notice  of  it  and
certainly no evidence  that  anybody  has  been  actually  inspired  to  do
anything of a serious nature as a result of reading it.

56. We remind ourselves of what this is all about.  It is the  Secretary  of
State's contention that the Claimant is disqualified from the scope of  the
Refugee Convention because she has been "guilty of  acts  contrary  to  the
purposes and principles of the United Nations".  The United Nations Charter
sets out four main purposes:

1. Maintaining worldwide peace and security

2. Developing relations among nations

3. Fostering cooperation between nations in order to solve economic,
  social, cultural, or humanitarian international problems

4. Providing a forum for bringing countries together to meet the UN's
  purposes and goals

57. In this appeal it is agreed that the Claimant has  done  things  capable
of beings acts contrary to these purposes.  It is also clear law that it is
a  very  serious  step  to  determine  that  a  person's  conduct   is   so
reprehensible that it takes them outside  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
Convention being a decision that they are not entitled to be protected from
the risk of serious ill-treatment under the Refugee Convention.  There  has
to be a high threshold defined in terms  of  the  gravity  of  the  act  in
question.

58. All of these things were fully in the mind of the First-tier Tribunal.

59. It is apposite to remind ourselves  of  the  approach  of  Irwin  LJ  in
Youssef.  He said:

  "85. It may be helpful to consider separately the quality of the acts  in
  question and their gravity or severity.  To adopt an  illustration  which
  arose in argument, it is easy to conceive of  an  immature  18  year  old
  going online from his suburban bedroom, and using the most lurid terms in
  calling for international jihad.  The nature or quality of this would, it
  seems to me,  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Article  1F(c).   It  would
  represent active encouragement or  incitement  of  international  terror.
  However, it would be unlikely, without more, to be grave  enough  in  its
  impact to satisfy the approach laid down in Al-Sirri.   That  might  well
  require more:  evidence of wide international readership, of  large-scale
  repetition or re-tweeting, or citation by those who were moved to join an
  armed struggle, for example.

  86.   It is obviously right, for the reasons given by the  Supreme  Court
  in Al-Sirri, that careful consideration is given to the gravity or impact
  of any acts relied upon.  This is the answer to the appellant's arguments
  as to the vital importance of  protection  of  refugees,  and  that  such
  protection should not be lost for 'mere speech'.  Freedom  of  speech  is
  qualified under the United Nations  Convention,  as  under  ECHR  or  the
  European Charter.

  87. In paragraph 9 of their  Decision  and  Reasons,  UTIAC  made  direct
  reference to the 'helpful guidance' from the Supreme Court  in  Al-Sirri,
  quoted parts of paragraph 16 of the judgment and made direct reference to
  the contents of paragraph 36.  They were clearly aware therefore of  that
  guidance and of the need to consider the 'high threshold defined in terms
  of the gravity of the act in question'.  However, perhaps because of  the
  way the argument developed before them, they did not do so directly.   As
  I have already indicated, they dealt fully with the argument that  crimes
  must be proved, and did so correctly.  However, there is  no  passage  in
  their reasons which demonstrates that  thereafter  they  stood  back  and
  considered the gravity or seriousness of  Youssef's  conduct,  once  that
  argument was disposed of.  In the  end  I  am  not  convinced  that  they
  directed themselves on this  issue  with  sufficient  clarity.   On  that
  ground, but on that ground alone, I would  allow  Youssef's  appeal,  and
  remit the matter to the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration".

60. As indicated above on reconsideration the Upper Tribunal  again  decided
to dismiss the appeal.  As far as we are aware that decision has  not  been
the subject of any successful challenge.

61. It is apt to consider here Irwin LJ's summary of the  relevant  part  of
resolution 2178, emphasising the  parts  that  are  most  relevant  to  the
decision that we have to make. The resolution referred to:

  Expressing concern  over  the  increased  use  by  terrorists  and  their
  supporters of communications technology for the purpose  of  radicalizing
  to terrorism, recruiting and inciting others to  commit  terrorist  acts,
  including through the internet, and financing and facilitating the travel
  and subsequent activities of foreign terrorist fighters, and  underlining
  the need for Member States to act  cooperatively  to  prevent  terrorists
  from  exploiting  technology,  communications  and  resources  to  incite
  support for terrorist acts, while respecting human rights and fundamental
  freedoms and in compliance with  other  obligations  under  international
  law,
  ...

62. The nature of the conduct is not only clearly contrary to  the  purposes
of the United Nations but is an example of a relatively recent way in which
those purposes can be thwarted.

63. There are three factors in the First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning  which,
we find, do at least cumulatively, make out the necessary gravity.

64. First is the  volume  of  Twitter  activity.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
asserted that that on its own is not of "great significance".  According to
the First-tier Tribunal the problem is not the scale of  the  dissemination
but the effect that it has.  We agree in  the  sense  that  we  doubt  that
volume alone could establish the necessary  gravity.  Drivel,  on  a  large
scale, makes a lot of drivel but would not undermine  the  purpose  of  the
United Nations. The  conduct  complained  of  here  was  not  "drivel".  It
included "gruesome images of prisoners about to be beheaded" which  conduct
the Claimant intended to encourage (see sentencing remarks). We regard  the
scale as important.  The conduct complained of was not a one-off rant  said
in private and possibly overheard but was  circulated  deliberately  to  as
large an audience as could be found for the purpose of encouraging  terror.
As indicated there is some dispute over the size of that  audience  but  it
was conduct intended to encourage terrorism and it was sent to thousands of
people.

65. Second, there is the timescale.  According  to  the  sentencing  remarks
this went on for nearly a year. Again, contrary to the view of  the  First-
tier Tribunal, we find that this is a significant aggravating  factor  that
increases the gravity of the conduct. It was not someone "sounding off" but
persistent as well as large scale misconduct.

66.  We  note  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  able  to  get  a   clear
understanding of the number of occasions offensive tweets  were  sent.   It
rejected the highest figures found in some  of  the  paper  and  gave  good
reasons for that but it is also clear that the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
expressly that the claimant "posted what we consider to be an average of at
most 50 tweets a day over the course of 347 days" (see paragraph 121).   We
find that these are levels of activity which take the case  away  from  the
isolated youth ranting and elevate it into a higher category and  that  the
First-tier Tribunal was just wrong to take a contrary view.

67.  Further,  these  two  points  are  linked  by  supporting  a   criminal
prosecution. We are not saying that a criminal conviction is  necessary  or
determinative and we accept that concepts and even phrases that  appear  in
national criminal legislation and  international  treaties  should  not  be
assumed always to mean the same in each context. Nevertheless the fact that
conduct amounted to offences under the Terrorism Act  sufficiently  serious
to warrant a substantial sentence of imprisonment is,  we  find,  itself  a
strong indicator that the conduct was  contrary  to  the  purposes  of  the
United Nations and the First-tier Tribunal, we find, rather lost  sight  of
this.

68. We also do find it significant that the claimant's  website  was  "on  a
site associated with Al Qaeda your Twitter account was noted to be  one  of
66 important jihadist accounts".  We would have liked to  know  more  about
that as no doubt would the First-tier Tribunal but, unlike  the  First-tier
Tribunal, we find that this clear, if limited,  description  is  enough  to
show this  claimant's  activities  were  of  sufficient  prominence  to  be
commended by Al Qaeda and the First-tier Tribunal was, with great  respect,
wrong to say that this was not  a  factor  singularly  or  cumulatively  to
elevate the conduct to be sufficiently grave and severe to  disqualify  the
claimant. It is clear  evidence  that  the  Claimant's  intended  behaviour
mattered to Al Qaeda. It was significant even though there is  no  evidence
that it was heeded directly.

69. We have reflected before making these observations.   We  do  find  that
the Secretary of State has not given the Tribunal the  assistance  that  it
wanted.  This is in no way a criticism of Ms Patry.  The problem existed  a
long time before she had any conduct of the case.  The  difficulty  is  the
very important decision that a person's conduct has taken her  outside  the
protection of the Refugee Convention, is supported by little  more  than  a
few selected paragraphs in the judge's sentencing remarks.  It could easily
have been more but it was, we find, enough.

70. We have also applied our minds carefully to the question of  whether  we
are merely disagreeing with the First-tier Tribunal, which is not relevant,
or determining that they were wrong to take the view that it did  which  is
highly pertinent.  We have decided it is the  latter.   As  Irwin  LJ  made
clear since the case of Al-Sirri the United Nations has  reflected  on  the
harm that can be done by computerised activity.  It  is  not  necessary  to
show actual harm being caused although it would not hinder the Secretary of
State's case if that could be done.

71. We find that a person who sets out to encourage terrorism  and  does  so
by circulating encouraging and destructive material over the internet  many
times a day for the best part of a year cannot avoid being  found  to  have
been undermining the purposes of the United Nations.  The necessarily  high
threshold is crossed by the repetition of the offences.  In this case it is
compounded by the clear evidence that there  was  success  in  the  project
because the conduct was commended by an Al Qaeda  supporting  organisation.
That is independent evidence of the importance of the conduct.  The  First-
tier Tribunal should have given a lot more weight to these things. This  is
why we find the First-tier Tribunal was wrong and why we overturn it.

72. We must also add that we are appreciative  of  the  care  taken  by  the
First-tier Tribunal to set out its reasons in a difficult area.

73. This disposes of the appeal because if the Claimant cannot  come  within
the protection of the Convention it is immaterial whether or not she can be
a refugee who is refouled.

74. Nevertheless, we will consider the points made.

75. Given our finding on Article 1F(c) we find that the First-tier  Tribunal
must be wrong to say that the Claimant has  not  committed  a  particularly
serious crime.  We have already acknowledged that this is a difficult  area
of law. However it is clear that the offence  must  have  some  element  or
characteristic that makes it particularly serious.  Our  decision  that  it
took the perpetrator out of the protection of the Refugee  Convention  does
that.

76. With respect of Mr Mackenzie's arguments we  see  no  need  to  say  any
more.

77. Ground 4 concerns the contention that the claimant is a  danger  to  the
community.  Again, we do not wish to be disrespectful to Counsel  but  this
time we are completely against Ms Patry.  The First-tier Tribunal correctly
recognised the need to look at the present circumstances because  the  test
is cast in the present tense.  There is an abundance of evidence considered
very carefully and responsibly by the First-tier Tribunal  in  considerable
detail to support its conclusion the claimant  was  not  a  danger  to  the
community.  It does not matter how dangerous she may have been in the past.
 There are very good reasons to think that those dangers have now passed.

78. It follows that if we are wrong in our  finding  that  the  claimant  is
excluded by Article 1F the  appeal  was  allowed  rightly  even  though  we
disagree about the particularly serious crime.  However, we have  explained
why we disagree with the First-tier Tribunal.  As was  explained  elsewhere
this is not an appeal that will lead directly to the claimant  leaving  the
United Kingdom, but we find she is not a refugee.

Notice of Decision

79. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. We  set  aside  its  decision  and
substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 31 January 2020                |







