
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11957/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2019                  |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Makerjee, Counsel instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the public  to  identify  the  Respondent.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the appellant is an asylum seeker and is entitled to privacy.

2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Ethiopia born in July  2000  against  a
decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a
decision of the Secretary of State refusing him asylum or other former kind
of international protection.  Permission to appeal was given by the  First-
tier Tribunal because:

  "It is arguable that the judge failed to make findings in relation to the
  appellant's account of events in Ethiopia and/or, as the  grounds  assert
  at (a), failed to give adequate reasons  for  findings;  failed  to  take
  account of the expert psychological  report;  and  failed  to  take  into
  account or give adequate reasons for  rejecting  evidence  of  sur  place
  activity.  Moreover as the grounds also submit, it is arguable  that  the
  judge failed to consider the evidence in the round.  All grounds  may  be
  argued."

3. Mr Makerjee adopted the grounds  and  submitted  that  the  Decision  and
Reasons is fundamentally unsatisfactory and the  appeal  had  to  be  heard
again.  Having reflected on the matter I have come to the  conclusion  that
Mr Makerjee was right.

4. In summary it is the appellant's case that  he  has  been  severely  ill-
treated by the authorities in Ethiopia because of  his  political  activity
and since fleeing to the United Kingdom he has associated  himself  with  a
political organisation known as Ginbot 7 and would be  at  risk  on  return
because of his perceived opposition to the government.

5. I am satisfied from  the  background  evidence  that  if  this  claim  is
established then it is sufficiently  cogent  for  it  to  be  at  least  be
arguable that the appellant needs protection.

6. The First-tier Tribunal disbelieved the appellant's  evidence  about  his
commitment to Ginbot.  Certainly his evidence of involvement with Ginbot in
the United Kingdom was decidedly scanty and he failed to  answer  questions
that an ordinarily healthy supporter could have been expected to answer  if
he were indeed committed to the cause.

7. The difficulty is that  the  appellant  has  produced  evidence  that  he
suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder which  is  known  sometimes  to
make it difficult for patients to give clear histories or even have a clear
recollection of events.

8. This is a case where there is a supporting report from Dr Monica  Carter.
Although she is a general rather than consulting medical  practitioner  she
has an interest in and experience of asylum seekers and claimed victims  of
torture.  Her conclusions were that the appellant had been ill-treated  and
the injuries  on  his  body  were  "typical"  and  in  some  cases  "highly
consistent" with the declared causes.  Overall she found the combination of
symptoms:

  "Congruent with the stated history and does not give rise to any clinical
  suspicion of fabrication.  The clinical picture does not suggest a  false
  allegation of trauma."

9. It is unclear what the judge made of this evidence.  What ought  to  have
happened is the judge should have considered it and either accepted  it  or
given proper reasons for not accepting it and, if he chose  to  accept  it,
that would probably have been a sensible starting point for  assessing  the
rest of the evidence.  This has not happened.  Rather the judge, exactly as
criticised in the grounds and in  the  summary  for  giving  permission  to
appeal, concentrated on unsatisfactory evidence about  sur  place  activity
and rather lost sight of the evidence which might  provide  an  explanation
for his fears of return and inability to be a better historian.

10. I have reminded myself of the quality of the medical  evidence  and  the
low standard of  proof  but  I  do  not  think  it  appropriate  to  simply
substitute a decision.   The  evidence  needs  to  be  heard  and  analysed
properly.

11. Mr Tufan sought to defend the decision  and  although  he  was  able  to
make,  with  respect,  entirely   sensible   submissions   concerning   the
consequences of the findings that had been made he could not deal with  the
underlying problem of the failure to take proper  account  of  the  medical
evidence confirming the history of ill-treatment in Ethiopia.

12. This appeal has to be heard again  and  I  find  it  most  suitable  for
disposal in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

13. The appeal is allowed to the extent that I set  aside  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal because it erred in law and I have decided that the
appeal must be determined again in the First-tier Tribunal where all issues
can be re-argued.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 January 2020                |







