
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11639/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 January 2020                   |On 29 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     IZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn, instructed by A. Seelhoff Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal continues in the Upper
Tribunal pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008.  There should be no disclosure of any matter that may lead to
the identification of the appellant.  Failure to comply with this order may
result in contempt proceedings.

Introduction

The appellant is a national of Ukraine, where she was born in 1968.  She
has been granted permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Row who for reasons given in his decision dated 11 September 2019,
dismissed her appeal which had been on asylum and human rights grounds
(Article 8 not being relied on) against the Secretary of State's decision
dated 26 March 2018 refusing the appellant's protection and human rights
claim that had been made on 9 August 2017 shortly after her arrival in the
United Kingdom on 25 July that year.  The appellant had arrived with a
visitor's visa in the United Kingdom with her second husband (KT) and
younger daughter (SN), both of whom are also Ukrainian nationals.  He and
her daughter are dependants on that application which was based on a risk
from her former husband (VN) who had abused the appellant in the course of
their marriage.

The appellant gave a detailed account of those difficulties in an interview
on 31 January 2018.

As to that claim, the Secretary of State accepted that the appellant had
been employed as a violinist with the National Opera of Ukraine and that
she had been dismissed due to her refusal to sign a new employment
contract.  Her claim was based on her former husband having been
responsible for the termination of her employment.  The Secretary of State
did not accept that there was evidence to show that VN had sufficient
influence that the National Opera of Ukraine would amend their human
resources policy and lose many talented musicians in order to disguise and
target the termination of the appellant's employment.

Judge Row heard evidence from the appellant, KT and ON, the appellant's
older daughter aged 27, who had arrived in the United Kingdom in 2013 where
she has settled.  KT has applied for asylum at the same time as the
appellant which had also been refused on 26 March 2018 but he had not
appealed the decision.  SN (aged 15) is the younger of two daughters the
appellant had with VN.  The appellant and VN divorced in 2013.

In summarising the appellant's case the judge noted evidence of incidents
of conflict between the appellant and her current and former husbands,
resulting in the police being called on several occasions.  The breakup had
been acrimonious.  The appellant had become homeless as her former husband
had re-occupied the matrimonial home culminating in her attendance at the
property in mid-2016 to gain entry.  The judge also observed that the
orchestra for which she and KT worked had been in dispute with the Ukraine
Opera about the terms of new contracts which had resulted in the entire
orchestra being dismissed.  It was the appellant's contention that her
former husband had had something to do with this.

As to the Secretary of State's case Judge Row observed that the respondent
had considered the appellant's credibility damaged by her use of a forged
document to leave Ukraine, had told lies in her visa application and had
delayed claiming asylum.

In his assessment of the evidence Judge Row explained at [35] to [41]:

"35. Whilst I accept that the matters raised by the respondent do damage
the appellant's credibility I accept the appellant's account that she was
involved in an unpleasant divorce from her first husband which had led to
litigation and to police involvement in Ukraine.  The appellant produced
numerous documents in her bundle which included a letter from her lawyer,
court documents, letters to and from the police in Ukraine complaining
about various matters, and medical evidence of minor injuries allegedly
received in an assault.  These collaborate her claims.  [VN] has not had
the opportunity to comment on the allegations made against him.  He may
have had a different interpretation of events had he been able to put his
side of the story.

36.  The two videos referred to above show an incident on 24 September 2013
apparently filmed by a neighbour.  It shows the appellant and [VN] in a
room with about four or five police officers.  [VN] is doing nothing.  The
appellant is involved in an argument with the police.  The police officers
are standing around listening to her.

37.  The second video is said to be from June 2014.  It is said to have
been taken by someone on [VN]'s behalf.  It shows him knocking at a door.
The door is answered by the appellant.  There is a heated exchange.  Most
of the heat appears to be coming from the appellant.  There is pushing and
shoving.  There is a child crying in the background.  The appellant said
that [VN] had taken the video in order to show her to be a bad mother.
Another view is that [VN] may have taken it to protect himself from
allegations of misconduct.

38.  That the last allegation of any physical abuse made by the appellant
relates to 2014.  [KT] in his statement dated June 10 May 2018 [sic] said
that there had been incidents in February 2017 when he was threatened by
two men concerning the return of some documents and medals.  He further
says that on 15 April 2017 he was kidnapped by unknown men and kept in
custody and mistreated for three days.  That was his evidence.  I do not
believe him.

39.  The reasons I do not believe him is that these allegations of serious
threats to and kidnap of her husband have never been part of the
appellant's case.  She did not mention them in her statement made to the
police in Ukraine dated 13 July 2017 at page 33 in the respondent's bundle.
 She did not raise them in her asylum interview.  She did not raise them in
her statement dated 10 May 2018.  These are serious allegations and if they
had occurred it would be expected that the appellant would have mentioned
them.  She did not.

40.  This was an acrimonious breakup of a marriage in which neither party
has behaved well.  They have each made spurious complaints in order to
cause the other trouble.  They have each inappropriately involved their
daughter [SN] in their matrimonial disputes.  It is not surprising that
this has been to her detriment.

41.  I find that the last allegation of physical abuse by [VN] was in 2014.
 Since that time the appellant has lived in Ukraine with her daughter.  She
has been involved in litigation concerning property and custody of the
child.  I do not find that the appellant's dismissal from work had anything
to do with [VN].  She was dismissed with the rest of the members of the
orchestra because of a dispute about a new contract.  I do not find that
[VN] has been in any position to influence the police or the courts.  The
evidence is to the contrary.  The courts have intervened to protect the
appellant's rights and the police had investigated allegations when they
have been made.  There is video evidence of that.  There is documentary
evidence of that."

 1. By way of conclusion the judge explained at [42] to [47]:

"42. The issue is whether there is a real risk of persecution and harm to
the appellant from [VN] if she returns to Ukraine.  I do not find that
there is such a risk.  There has been abusive conduct in the past.  There
has been no serious injury although any injury is unacceptable.  The last
incident was in 2014.  There have been no significant incidents since that
time.

43.  I do not find that [VN] has any influence either with the courts or
the police in Ukraine.  The evidence is to the contrary.  The documentary
evidence produced by the appellant shows that the police have investigated
complaints.  The courts have adjudicated on matters.  I do not find that
the appellant is at risk from [VN] in the Ukraine.

44.  The background evidence produced by the respondent in Country
Information and Guidance Ukraine: Background information, including actors
of protection and internal relocation August 2016 is that Ukraine has an
operating police force, laws to protect its citizens, and a judiciary
prepared to enforce those laws.

45.  This information is confirmed by the appellant's evidence.  She has
reported matters to the police.  The police have investigated allegations
of assault.  She has reported allegations of misconduct on behalf of [VN]
which had been investigated.  She has gone to court to secure property
rights and to contest custody.

46.  Those custody proceedings have not yet been resolved.  This is because
the appellant chose to leave the country illegally by using a forged
document and to take her daughter with her.  Even if there were a risk of
persecution and harm to the appellant, and I have found that there is not,
the background evidence, and the facts of this particular appeal, indicate
that adequate protection is available in Ukraine to the standard set out in
Horwath and SSHD [2000] UKHL 37.

47.  The appellant does not succeed in her claim for asylum, on the grounds
of humanitarian protection, or under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR which are all
argued on the same factual basis."

The grounds of challenge are fourfold.  The first ground asserts error by
the judge based on a failure to take into account a material fact as to the
threat of kidnap of her current husband.  The second ground argues error in
a failure by the judge to deal with the evidence of the ON, who had
provided a statement and gave evidence at the hearing.  Ground three argues
the judge had erred in his assessment of the video evidence footage and
ground four argues a material error of fact by the judge as to the status
of VN.

In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam considered
these grounds arguable with a concluding observation at [5] of her
decision:

"5.  However, without seeing the video I am unable to comment on the
accuracy of the judge's interpretation of it.  Should the appellant wish to
proceed with this part of the challenge, she should ensure that the footage
is available for the judge to consider at the hearing."

Prior to the hearing on 8 January 2020 application was made to add an
additional ground.  This was in terms that the judge had failed to take
account of all the video evidence.

"In fact five videos were played specifically two videos from 23 September
2013, one dated 3 June 2014 and two dated 7 June 2014.  The judge indicates
that there was only one video from June 2014 and his summary does not
include reference to the video of 3 June 2014 which shows the most extreme
assault.  It is submitted that he cannot have had regard to all the
evidence."

Ms Cleghorn had not represented the appellant before the First-tier
Tribunal.  There had been subsequently a change of solicitors and it was
not clear why this aspect had not been raised in the earlier grounds.  Ms
Cleghorn explained that the videos had been shown to the judge on counsel's
device being an iPad or laptop.  Judge Row refers only to two videos at
[36] and [37] of his decision, the content of which he summarises.

I refused the application after having drawn the parties' attention to the
judge's note of hearing.  This refers to videos 1 and 2 with notes of the
content.  There follows the following text under the heading "Resume".

"Two more videos which app has produced over lunch.  Can't see anything on
them.  Will not show but appellant will explain their context."

The judge's note continues with a record of the evidence-in-chief of the
appellant, which again refers to two videos.  In respect of the latter,
there is reference to an aspect of the account which refers to handcuffed
and the judge has noted that there was nothing on the video about this.
The appellant appears to have been referring to a different video.  Her
counsel appears to have observed that there is a video that had not been
seen which she was going to ask the appellant about.  The judge's note
continues: "I'm not prepared to allow her to discuss a video we've not
seen.  She's been unreliable on the ones we have sent.  Ask her to describe
the incident and date".

It is clear to me that the judge was only shown two videos, as is evident
from his decision.  The grounds of challenge are detailed.  There was no
explanation why this aspect was not raised in the initial challenge and in
any event, having regard to the judge's note, there was no substance in the
point.

Following submissions on each of the four grounds, I reserved my decision.
Neither Ms Cleghorn nor Ms Pettersen was able to provide a copy of ON's
statement which is the subject of ground two and I agree that this should
be provided by Monday, 20 January.  As it turns out, a further examination
of the contents of the file brought it to light and I have not needed to
wait for that to be provided.  I take each ground in turn.

Ground One

This ground explains that the judge had erred in relation to his findings
on credibility of KT in paragraphs [38] and [39] (cited above).  KT's
statement pointed out in paragraph [10] that he had not told his wife about
the kidnapping because of the circumstances and these were things that were
difficult for him to speak about.  It is argued that the judge materially
erred by deciding that the evidence of KT was not true on the basis that
his wife had not mentioned this aspect as there was clear and credible
evidence that he had not told her.  His is evidence on this issue was not
specifically challenged.

KT explains in his statement that on 15 April 2017 he was kidnapped.  This
followed a disagreement with the appellant and he had stayed with a friend
on 14 April not far from her flat.  The statement explains the detail of
the assault by individuals in military uniform with weapons.  KT understood
the reason for kidnap was because of certain documents and medals.
Reference is made to the screening interview and the Home Office concerns
that there were matters he had not mentioned at that first interview when
he had been asked not to give too much detail.  His assailants were wearing
masks.  KT regrets that he had not told his assailants at the time that the
documents in question had been destroyed.  They had also contacted his
father for a ransom payment of $2,000.  He was told to call the appellant
to explain that everything was okay with him.  He did not call her but his
cousin instead.  He was released on 18 April in the earlier hours of the
morning in a forest.

The documents appeared to have been those that the appellant's former
husband VN had taken from the authorities without permission according to
KT's statement.  In her substantive interview the appellant was questioned
about documents when asked about VN.   She referred to his "secretiveness
and that he had lived a double life".   She did not know where he worked at
the time of her interview but it appears that her solicitor (in Ukraine)
had access to court material and "internal documents".  It is not entirely
clear from a reading of the interview and the appellant's subsequent
statement the precise nature of the contents of those documents, which
appears to be different from the documents the appellant referred to in
connection with the matrimonial and ancillary proceedings.  In response to
question 310 when the appellant was asked what the other reasons were for
wanting to claim asylum in the United Kingdom she explained:

"After I got divorced I started finding documents in my house belonging to
my husband from SBU and the main department of protection of information
and also state medals of people who worked for him when he was head of the
legal department of when he worked for the secret department of the
government there was protecting the government communications he was the
head of the legal department of this department of this directorate.  When
he changed his job he took the documents from this position and it was
marked confidential and they were secret files of SBU, there were a lot of
them and he had some medals as well that he was supposed to award to people
in his department but he didn't.  When I questioned him about these medals
they were supposed to be awarded to someone else he said they didn't
deserve them."

When asked how this had impacted on the appellant, she explained that she
could not explain it shortly.  In the course of her answers she explained
that she had sent letters to SBU and the prosecution office saying that
"... these people should get the medals that they deserved".

As to how this posed a risk for her, she explained:

         "316.    I also sent letters about the documents that my ex-husband
                and they are in my house and I wanted to return these
                documents officially."

As to how this affected her, the appellant explained that she had exposed
"his illegal" and that he had wanted to kill her. In her statement the
appellant explained that based on evidence she had obtained from the web it
was confirmed that her ex-husband, VN, was applying for a position as head
of chief director at the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Judge Row explained that he had not believed KT in respect of the kidnap
for two reasons.  The first was that she had not mentioned them in her
statement made to the police in Ukraine in July 2017.  The second was that
she had not raised them in her asylum interview nor had she raised them in
her statement dated 10 May.  It is clear the point that the judge was
making was the failure by the appellant to refer to this aspect at all, not
only in Ukraine but also in her asylum interview and her subsequent
statement.  That statement dated 10 May 2018 follows refusal of KT's claim
on 26 March 2018.  The refusal letter is in the papers before me which
refers to the kidnap incident.  The documents which appear to have been
part of the focus of the kidnapping were clearly in the minds of KT and the
appellant in the light of the detail of their respective concerns on this
described in KT's statement.  I consider the judge was entitled to draw an
adverse inference from this aspect in the light of the risks it is
considered the parties considered possession of these documents and medals
had placed them in.  I do not consider this ground has any substance.

As I observed to Ms Cleghorn, a reading of the determination shows that the
judge in fact accepted the appellant's account of the problems she had with
her former husband explained in the passages I have cited above.  He
concluded in summary:

The last allegation of physical abuse by VN was in 2014 and there had been
no significant incidents since then.

The appellant's dismissal from work had nothing to do with VN, who had not
been in any position to influence the police or courts; the evidence was to
the contrary.

The courts had intervened to protect the appellant's rights and have
investigated allegations when they have been made according to the
documentary evidence.

But for the kidnap incident, Judge Row accepted the core of the appellant's
account of problems that stem from her former husband for which he
considered protection had been and would be available were they to
continue.  With that in mind, I now turn to ground two.

Ground Two

As it became apparent at the hearing, ON has been in the United Kingdom
since 2013.  Her statement refers to a visit made to Kiev in November 2014
when the appellant was away and when her father showed up.  The police did
not respond to calls that she had made and although they refused initially
to do so they ultimately came.  Otherwise ON does not add anything to the
claim.  Since the judge accepted the appellant's account of acrimony
between her and VN, I do not consider his failure to specifically assess
her evidence as material.  The judge acknowledged that she gave evidence in
paragraph [14] and also referred to her evidence in some detail in [19].  I
am satisfied that he had proper regard to all the relevant evidence and no
error emerges based on the challenge in ground two.

Ground Three

In the light of the clarification from reading the judge's note, the
assertion that his assessment of the footage was not accurate falls away,
leaving the limb pursued by Ms Cleghorn that the judge had not correctly
characterised the evidence.  I do not find any merit in this ground.  The
judge reached a conclusion on what he saw, not on what he had not seen.  In
the circumstances, there is no requirement for me to examine the videos
seen.  It is a matter of interpretation and assessment of that evidence,
which is a matter for the judge.  His note of hearing shows that he had
careful regard to what he in fact saw and whilst the appellant may disagree
with his inferences from that evidence, this did not result in material
error, particularly in the light of the judge having accepted the core of
the evidence of acrimony.

Ground Four

Here it is argued that the judge had erred in finding that VN was not a
colonel and thus had made an error of fact.  The appellant had clearly
stated in her evidence that her husband was a colonel of justice, which was
confirmed in the police application form appearing in the respondent's
appeal bundle which also confirmed that he had applied for a post of head
of the chief directorate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs in the
Ukraine.

In the course of submissions on this aspect, I was taken to the relevant
document at pages 51 and 52 of the respondent's bundle.  It appears to be a
web download from the National Police of Ukraine website.  From this, it
appears that VN was educated at university between 1989 and 1994 leading to
qualification as a lawyer.  He thereafter held a post at the National
Academy of Public Administration under the President of Ukraine between
2009 and 2010 in the faculty of management and public development.  Under a
further heading Information on Military Records, the military rank is given
as colonel of justice.  The following chronology shows that VN's role in
the military was between 1986 and 1988, thus prior to his years at
university.  He held a post as a senior consultant in the Ministry of
Justice of Ukraine in 1995 and in the five years that followed was senior
legal Counsel before becoming head of the legal group of the National
Academy of the Security Service between 2000 and 2004.  In 2012 he became a
consultant with a company called Lotusoft Limited.  Below an entry dated
April 15, 2014 a number of names are given with reference to the post of
the head of the chief directorate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
VN's is listed (although with a slightly different spelling) as someone who
had expressed a desire to take part in the competition.

In her asylum interview the appellant was referred at question 295 to an
earlier response that VN was very high up and a colonel.  The question was:
"You have said your ex-husband is very high up he is a colonel, you have
said he is influential and has lots of power, there was no trace of him
externally, you think he is well-known in Ukraine, can you explain why
there is no information about him?"

The appellant responded:

"I will explain.  When I contacted the tax office asking where he was
working they said he founded a company in Cyprus.  I officially requested
the documents and I received an official reply saying I had no reply to
receive this confidential information.  He works for gaming industry
gambling really, Lotsoft and Emist.  It's gambling industry it's not
legal."

Questioning on this aspect continued and the appellant was unable to give
an explanation why she considered the appellant to have been a colonel.

The judge observed in paragraph [30] cited above the appellant's evidence
given at the hearing that it was not true that VN was a colonel in the
Ukraine Intelligence Service.  She explained that he had never been but had
worked as a lawyer in a government department.  It is not evident that VN
was successful in the application in 2014 sdescribed in [31] above.

I am unable to find any merit in this ground at all, particularly in the
light of the evidence as recorded that the appellant gave before the judge.

Conclusion

Accordingly, none of the grounds of challenge is made out.  I reminded Ms
Cleghorn that there was no challenge to the judge's conclusion that
protection would be available in the light of the accepted account of
acrimony between her and her former husband.  She referred in her response
to the country guidance decision in VB and Another (Draft evaders and
prison conditions) Ukraine CG [2017] UKUT 00079 (IAC) in support of her
contention that there was acknowledged corruption in Ukraine.  Whilst that
may be so, I am satisfied however that the judge reached a legitimate
conclusion rationally open to him on the particular facts of this case on
the availability of protection including reference to the country
information.  He did not err in deciding that protection would be available
to the appellant, an aspect on which no challenge has in any event been
made.

Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 23 January 2020

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
