
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12268/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2020                   |On 9 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     PL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs, Counsel, instructed by Curling Moore
                    Solicitors & Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings

The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam.  According to the Secretary of State
his date of birth is 1 January 1998.  The Appellant says that his date of
birth is 9 November 1988. The First-tier Tribunal anonymised the Appellant.
 There is no reason for me to interfere with this.

The Appellant came to the United Kingdom on 17 April 2016.  He made a claim
on protection grounds on the same day.  However, this application was
withdrawn on 7 July 2016.  The Appellant absconded.  He made further
submissions on 14 August 2019.  Following from those further submissions
the Secretary of State on 22 November 2019 refused his application on
asylum grounds.

The Appellant appealed against the decision.  His appeal was dismissed by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Skehan in a decision which was promulgated on 19
February 2020 following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 22 January 2020.

On 27 July 2020 the matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?, who
decided that the judge erred in a number of respects.  Her decision was
made on the papers under Rule 34 of the 2008 Procedure Rules.  She took
into account the written submissions that had been provided from the
parties.

Judge Keki? identified errors of law in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal and set aside the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal. The
error of law decision reads as follows:

"16. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission and the
submissions made by both parties.  I am satisfied that, despite the absence
of any meaningful response to the directions from the appellant's new
representatives, for the following reasons the judge's determination
contains errors of law with respect to certain aspects of the claim.

17.  Plainly it was wrong for the judge to undertake post-hearing research
and then to decide not to give the parties any opportunity to put forward
any submissions they may wish to on that material.  Time and time again
judges are warned of such inappropriate behaviour so it is difficult to
understand why this judge took such a course of action.  This would have
been ameliorated by putting the material to the parties for a response but
there is a complete absence of any reasoning as to why the judge considered
this would not be necessary (at 7).  The error is material because the
judge then proceeded to rely on the evidence as part of her reasons for
dismissing the appeal (at 16).  It follows that her findings on risk of
return to the appellant on account of his religious beliefs are
unsustainable.  I, therefore, set aside the conclusions in that respect.

18.  I now proceed to consider her other findings and the grounds for
permission which are relied on in full by the appellant.  I note that
whilst permission to appeal was only granted on the above issue, and that
the granting judge found the other arguments less meritorious, he did not
prevent argument to be brought in pursuance.  The appellant's
representatives have chosen not to make any further arguments or to expand
upon them so I consider the points made in the grounds themselves and the
respondent's submissions.

19.  The first complaint is that the judge wrongly found a conflict in the
appellant's evidence as to practising his religion.  I agree with the
grounds in this respect.  Whilst the judge maintains that the appellant's
oral evidence of practising at home because there was no Pure Hoa Hao
community conflicted with the evidence in his witness statement that he
attended a temple in Croydon, it is plain from the Record of Proceedings
and indeed the determination itself (at 9) that the appellant did also
mention the temple in oral evidence.  The absence of evidence from the
Temple, whilst it would have been helpful, does not in itself mean that the
appellant never attended it.  The judge's assessment of how the appellant
practises his faith is therefore flawed and this matter will need to be re-
assessed.

20.  The second ground is that the judge did not consider an argument
before her; i.e. the article 8 claim.  It is maintained that this was
mentioned in the skeleton argument and had been addressed by the respondent
in her refusal letter.

21.  I do not find any merit in this complaint.  The respondent may have
considered article 8 in her decision making but no such claim had been made
to her in the appellant's application.  There is no mention of any article
8 claim in the letter of 13 August 2019 from the appellant's previous
representatives or in the appellant's accompanying witness statement of 9
August 2019.  Nor was any oral evidence called at the hearing in respect of
any private or family life and the appellant's witness statement of 23
December 2019 written in support of the appeal does not give any
information either.  The skeleton argument which is relied on in the
grounds is the only document in which article 8 is mentioned and it has to
be said the reference is brief and vaguely put (at 27).  It was not
expanded upon in oral submissions at the hearing.  Thus, whilst it may have
been preferable for the judge to refer to it and then conclude no claim was
made out, given the absence of any information as to a private or family
life and given the absence of any engagement in submissions with it, I do
not find that the judge's observation that no article 8 claim was pursued
amounts to a material error of law.

22.  The strongest point is, surprisingly, put as ground three, and I have
already dealt with that above at paragraph 12.

23.  Ground 4 complains that the wrong standard of proof was used.  This is
also unmeritorious.  The judge was aware of the correct standard (see
paragraphs 2 and 3 and repeated at 15, 16 and 18).  The complaint about a
few words of paragraph 15, as highlighted in the grounds, amounts to a
complaint over a turn of phrase rather than substance, particularly given
the judge's reference to the correct standard just two sentences earlier.

24.  Ground 5 complains that the judge did not follow the respondent's
policy on unaccompanied children when assessing the claim.  This complaint
is not fully supported by the determination.  The judge specifically noted
that the appellant had been a minor at the time the alleged events in
Vietnam took place and at the date of his departure (at 6 and 10).
However, I accept that there is no clear consideration of the appellant's
youth when his account of his experiences in China and, subsequently, in
the UK were considered.  These matters will have to be re-assessed with
that in mind.

25.  I now consider whether any of the judge's other findings can be
preserved.  The appellant's representatives make no submissions on this in
their second response even though the respondent had set out very clearly
in her submissions which findings she invited the Tribunal to preserve.

26.  I preserve the judge's finding that the appellant is a follower of the
Pure Hoa Hao Buddhist faith, inferred from the contents of paragraph 8.

27.  I do not preserve any findings made by the judge as to the appellant's
religious practices or the risk he would face on return to Vietnam because
of his religion.

28.  I do not preserve the finding that the appellant's father was treated
as described for his religious/political activities or that the appellant
would not be at risk on account of his father's activities because those
findings are made with reference to the CPIN report which the judge should
not have considered (at 10).

29.  I preserve the finding that the appellant and his mother were not
caught for distributing leaflets.  That finding is not challenged in the
grounds and the judge's assessment and conclusions at paragraph 11 were
properly made.

30.  I do not preserve the findings on the appellant's experiences in China
and his account of being abducted in the UK for the reasons set out at 18
above.

31.  I preserve the finding that the appellant would not be at risk on
return because of his attendance at demonstrations in the UK because the
complaint about the wrong standard of proof being used to make that
assessment is not borne out.

32.  I preserve the finding that there was no article 8 claim before the
First-tier Tribunal.

33.  I would note the many spelling, typographical and other careless
errors in the determination (for eg, at 5(ii), (iv), (vii), (ix), (xi),
(xiii), (xv) and 10) although they have not been raised as an issue in the
grounds.  Whilst these are regrettable and should not have occurred, they
do not impact upon the findings that have been preserved.

34.  The issues to be re-determined are:

(i)  the manner in which the appellant practises his faith and the risk to
him on return for that reason;

(ii) the nature of his father's activities and his alleged ill treatment;

(iii)    whether the appellant would be at risk because of his father's
activities; and

(vi) whether he was held against his will in China and in the UK and, if
not, whether that damages his credibility.

35.  The appellant's youth at all relevant times must be taken into account
when fresh findings are made."

Judge Keki? made a number of directions at paragraphs 39 to 43 of her
decision, which included a direction that the parties serve and file
skeleton arguments and any further documentation relied on.

The Appellant's claim is that he is an orphan who has been raised by
adoptive parents.  He followed the Pure Hoa Hao Buddhist faith and he would
be at risk as a result of this on return to Vietnam.  He claims that his
adoptive father was involved with the Viet Tan Party and that he was
arrested and died whilst in prison.  As a result of this he fears he will
be at risk on return.  He says that he was held against his will in China
for two years and that after arriving here in the UK he was kidnapped and
forced to grow cannabis until he was able to escape.

There is an Appellant's bundle that was before the First-tier Tribunal
which includes the Appellant's witness statement.  The Judge of the First-
tier Tribunal summarised the Appellant's evidence at paragraph 5.    There
are a number of typographical errors, but the evidence as set out by the
judge is not challenged.  It reads as follows:

"5.  The appellant had the benefit of a Vietnamese interpreter during the
hearing.  The appellant confirmed that his witness statement was true, and
it was accepted as evidence in chief.  The appellant was allowed to adduce
further evidence in chief and was cross-examined.  The appellant's evidence
may be summarised as follows:

(i)  The appellant was born in Vietnam.  He was an orphan and given to a
monk of the temple and raised in the temple.  He was adopted by his father
[HL] and mother [HD].  The appellant's father passed away on 08/02/2013.
The appellant stayed with his mother until he left Vietnam but has now lost
contact with her.  The appellant went to school and finished his education
at year 9.  From the age of 14 he mostly stayed at home.  His schooling was
interrupted because his family faced problems with the government.  He has
not worked in Vietnam.

(ii) The appellant is a follower of Pure Hoa Hao Buddhism and his adoptive
parents were followers of this religion.  This religion was founded by
Master Huynh Phu So, who was considered a profit.  Part of the religious
teaching advocates democracy and giving power to the people.  Huynh Phu So
was considered an enemy and murdered on 24/02/1947.

(iii)    The appellant says that he prayed twice a day and describes in
detail the rituals followed.  During the course of the hearing, the
appellant told me that he mainly prays at home as there is not a Pure Hoa
Hao community in the UK.  He added that he visits the Linhson temple
regularly.  The appellant's witness statement states that there are events
arranged by Buddhists and the Pure Hoa Hao followers every Sunday.  No one
had attended Tribunal from the temple as he had not asked them to attend.

(iv) The appellant said he experienced persecution from for the Vietnamese
authorities on 18/05/2012 when he, along with his family organised a
celebration to mark the anniversary of the founding of the religion.  The
appellant's father was the local leader of the religious group and invited
65 other followers.  The celebration was interrupted by 7 uniformed
policemen and 5 in civil clothes.  They entered the house forcefully and
started shouting at the people asking why so many were gathered.  They
become aggressive.  They broke everything including the alter and pictures
of the master.  The arrested 8 people including the appellant's father and
mother and some others.  They were taken to the police station
interrogated, abused and threatened stop after 20 days, 6 were released,
all except the appellant's father and the deputy local leader.  They were
warned not to attend any religious celebrations.  On 18/06/2012 the
appellant's father and the deputy local leader were released with the
condition to report monthly for the next 6 months.  Thereafter the police
started visiting the appellant's house regularly and harassing them making
their day-to-day life difficult.

(v)  On 05/12/2012 the appellant's father went to Hanoi accompanied by the
deputy local leader.  They were arrested in Hanoi.  And taken to a police
station.  They were tortured and interrogated in Hoan Kien police station.

(vi) On 07/12/2012 the police came to the appellant's house with a search
warrant.  They found information on foreign organisations relating to
democracy and freedom of religion.  They realised that the appellant's
father was involved with the Viet Tan party, which led them to confiscate
the appellants' house.  The appellant and his mother were detained and
interrogated.  After 16 days they were released and forced to sign a
declaration not to be involved in any sort of activities against the
government.

(vii)    The appellant and his mother thereafter lived with a friend of his
mother's.  On 08/02/2013 the appellant heard news that his father had
passed away in prison.  He stopped going to school.  The appellant was told
that his father had passed away due to a lung infection.  The appellant
does not believe that believes that his father passed away due to torture
inside the police station.  The appellant sought to make a complaint to the
People Committee Bureau but was ignored.  The appellant and his mother
blamed the Vietnamese police and the government for their predicament.

(viii)   The appellant began distributing leaflets on 06/04/2013.  These
leaflets would say the Vietnamese government is corrupt... there is no
human rights and freedom of religion.  They arrest people with no reason.
The appellant started distributing leaflets twice a week.  He did so at
night when there were fewer people around.  The appellant distributed
leaflets about 9 to 10 times before being arrested on the last time.  He
was on a motorbike with his mother and was detected by a security man.  The
appellant and his mother were identified from CCTV and they were informed
that the police were looking for them as they had been identified through
the motorbike.

(ix) The appellant's mother arranged for them to leave the country.  She
did not have enough money to pay for an agent for both of them so she sent
the appellant first.  The appellant left Vietnam on 12/05/2013 and
travelled to China by lorry.  He lived in China for over 2 years and was
then helped to fly from China to Russia.  The appellant says he that was
the only time he used a fake passport.  He stayed in Russia for one month
and then travelled to Poland, then to France where he stayed for a month,
thereafter he was boarded in a lorry and arrived in the UK on 17/04/2016.
The appellant said that previously did not wish to disclose to the route
taken by his agent to UK authorities as they told him that they, being the
agent and people who arranged for him to come to the UK, would kill his
mother.

(x)  The appellant said that he was arrested upon his arrival on 17/04/2016
and he was taken to a detention centre.  At that time, he was 17 years old.
 He claimed asylum in the UK on the same day.  The following day he moved
to temporary accommodation.  That evening he went out with another
Vietnamese boy called Quang who was living in the same accommodation.  They
lost their way and that night slept on the street.  Due to the language
barrier they could not ask for help or explain their situation.  The
following morning, they were approached by a car, kidnapped and taken to a
house where there were 4 people from different nationalities.  He was
forced to do domestic work and thereafter grow cannabis.  During cross
examination the appellant told me that he was in a private house for over 2
years.  They grew cannabis inside the house and he was not allowed to go
out.  He was moved to many different houses during that time and lived in
many different houses.  He said each time that he moved to a new house he
attempted to escape but could not.  He would try to one the windows but
they would be locked and he could not break them open.  He would make noise
to try to attend attract attention from people outside but he would be
spotted by his captors and beaten up.  He was told that should he try again
he would be beaten severely.

(xi) In September 2018 there was an altercation in the house and the
appellant had the opportunity to run away.  The appellant withdrew his NRM
claim because he was scared to involve the police as he was obsessed by
Vietnamese police.  The appellant did not report his experience in the UK
to the UK police as he was afraid because he was involved in a an illegal
activity, although forced.

(xii)    Thereafter he met Ms Vuong who was supporting him with food and
accommodation and helped him find his solicitor.  Since being in the UK the
appellant has attended two demonstrations.  At those demonstrations they
demanded freedom for their religion and demanded that the communists
stopped suppressing their religion.  They also demanded the release of
religious activists.  The appellant attended his first demonstration on
10/12/2018 outside the Vietnamese Embassy in London.  The appellant says he
was informed of the demonstration by Ms Vuong.  During the demonstration
the appellant held banners saying, 'release the religious activists' and
'freedom of religion'.  There are pictures of the appellant at the
demonstration.

(xiii)   The appellant attended a second demonstration on 28/04/2019.  The
purpose of the demonstration was to demand freedom of religion and the
release of religious prisoners and the Communist to stop suppressing their
religion.  They were demanding democracy freedom and human rights of people
in Vietnam.  This demonstration also took place outside the Vietnamese
Embassy.  It was attended by over 200 people.  The appellant says that the
Vietnamese government will have video footage and CCTV of the
demonstrations.  Further these demonstrations on social media and the
internet.  He will be easily identified from them.

(xiv)    the appellant says that should he be returned to Vietnam he will
lose his religious freedom be arrested and imprisoned and may be killed
like his father.  The authorities have details and are aware of him.

(xv) The appellant refers to inconsistencies noted within his asylum
interview is and notes the words 'vehicle' or 'lorry' are subject to
confusion when translated into Vietnamese.

(xvi)    The appellant has not sought assistance from the Red Cross family
reunification service or the Vietnamese embassy in London because he was
scared for the safety of his mother in Vietnam."

The Appellant's evidence

The Appellant relied on a second witness statement of 24 September 2020.
He gave evidence before me and adopted both of his witness statements as
his evidence in chief.  He was cross examined by Mr Tufan.  His evidence
can be summarised.  The Appellant is active as a critic of the Vietnamese
government.  He continues to attend rallies, meetings and gatherings at the
temple in Croydon. He also practises is religion at home.

The agent who took him to China held him captive.  He was held in debt
bondage.  He wanted to escape but could not.  He owed the traffickers
money.  After two years in China he travelled to Russia and then France.
In France was put on a lorry.  He arrived in the United Kingdom.   He has
not seen the trafficker/agent since he got here.  He was kidnapped and
forced to work in a cannabis factory.  He escaped and met Ms Vuong in
Deptford.  She was not a witness.  She was at work and the Appellant did
not know that she needed to attend.

The Appellant's father invited people to the house on the day of the
ceremony in 2012.  There are four such ceremonies a year.  If the Appellant
was in Vietnam he would attend all of them.  He would never give up his
religion.  He practises every day.  He prays in front of the alter.  He
would be at risk in Vietnam because he and his mother delivered leaflets.

The Appellant attended two demonstrations in April and December 2019.  He
demonstrates for freedom of religion in Vietnam.  He does not attend
ceremonies in the United Kingdom because there is no group here of pure Hoa
Hoa Buddhists.



The Respondent's submissions

The Respondent continues to rely on the decision letter dated 22 November
2019 and the skeleton argument.  The Respondent also relies on the CPIN -
Vietnam: Hoa Hao Buddhism February 2020 and the Report of the Home Office
Fact-finding Mission published September 2019.

Although the Appellant has been found to be a follower of the Pure Hoa Hao
Buddhist faith, he has failed to provide any satisfactory evidence to
demonstrate how he practises his faith in the UK.  Although he claims to
have attended a temple in the UK, he has provided no corroborative evidence
from anyone connected with the temple. The evidence is that he preaches at
home.  There is no evidence that he attends a temple.  There is a small
number of people who have been arrested in Vietnam.  The Appellant does not
pose a threat to the government.

The Appellant has failed to establish that he openly practises his religion
in UK or that he would seek to do so on return to Vietnam.  The Respondent
relies on the February 2020 CPIN at 2.4.8-2.4.9.  The Appellant could
continue to follow his faith on return to Vietnam without facing the risk
of persecution or ill-treatment.

The Appellant has not established that he would practice his religion in a
way which would put him at risk from the authorities on return to Vietnam
or that he would have to change the way in which he practises his faith in
order to avoid persecution (HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2010] UKSC 31).  The Respondent submits that, even if the
Appellant follows his faith within an unregistered group, he has not
established that he has an opposition profile that would put him at risk.

It is accepted that the Appellant was a child at the time of events in
Vietnam, however he has failed to provide any evidence to corroborate his
account of his father's activities or alleged ill-treatment.

The Appellant does not have a political or imputed political profile which
would put him at risk on return.  Whilst the Respondent accepts that the
Appellant's evidence must be assessed in light of his young age at the time
of these events, it is submitted that he has failed to provide any evidence
to corroborate his account.  His credibility is damaged pursuant to s.8
Asylum and Immigration Act 2004.  The Appellant has not established that he
has a religious or political profile that would put him at risk on return
to Vietnam.

The Appellant's submissions

When considering the Appellant's   account of the events that took place in
Vietnam, the Tribunal must follow the Respondent's Asylum Policy Guidance,
cited with approval in AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT
16 and KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 552.,

The finding that the Appellant grew up in a household that followed the
unregistered sect of the Hoa Hao Buddhist religion was preserved by Upper
Tribunal Judge Kekic at [26] of the determination.  Therefore, the question
is whether the Appellant would practice his religion in a way which would
put him at risk from the authorities on return to Vietnam.  If he would not
do so, would this be to avoid persecution (HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State
for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31).

The Appellant has demonstrated his commitment to his religion and that his
religion forms his core beliefs in a number of ways:

His extensive knowledge of the history and practice of his religion;

His continued attendance at religious meetings in Vietnam, despite
harassment and arrests by the authorities;

He continues to carry out his prays twice a day in the United Kingdom; and

A attends the Linh Son Temple (a Vietnamese Buddhist Temple in South
London) for prayers at least once a month.

It must be considered what practice of Appellant's religion would put him
at risk in Vietnam.  The Appellant was not able to attend temples in
Vietnam because Pure Hoa Hao Buddhism is not a registered religion in
Vietnam, and therefore, they are not allowed to build Temples.  The
Appellant does attend the Temple in the United Kingdom. Therefore, it would
appear important to him to practice his religion with others.  In Vietnam
followers gather together for important religious ceremonies. Followers go
to other followers' homes, or host the gathering at their own home. Despite
followers meeting at each other's homes, the authorities still discovered
this form of practice.  The authorities were concerned by these gatherings
because they feared that people were coming together in opposition to the
government.  This has led to harassment, arrest, detention, and beatings of
followers.

Therefore, the Appellant openly practiced his religion in Vietnam and
continues to practice his religion openly in the United Kingdom.  There is
no evidence to suggest that he would act differently on return, but for the
persecution he would face.

Furthermore, the Appellant has attended demonstrations in the United
Kingdom, which demonstrates his continuing opposition to the government.
Therefore, he will be of interest to the authorities on return for the
activities already undertaken, together with his desire to continue his
religious practice and opposition to the government in Vietnam.

The account of his father's activities and his ill treatment in Vietnam has
remained consistent, and is consistent with the country information.

Whilst the Respondent alleges that the Appellant initially stated that his
fear was related to a land dispute, this does not contradict the
Appellant's account.  The Appellant's screening interview was conducted
over the telephone with the use of an interpreter, and he believes that
some matters may have been confused.  The Appellant was able to clarify in
his witness statement of 23 December 2019 that the government sealed his
house after they found religious material there.  Therefore, his parent's
house was confiscated, but this did not engage a land dispute.  This is
consistent with the background information about confiscation of land used
for religious purposes.

The alleged inconsistency about whether the Appellant was discouraged from
his faith takes his answers to the interview questions out of context.  It
is clear that the Appellant was released by the police on condition that he
did not attend any religious ceremonies [Q56].  Despite trying to
discourage the Appellant from his faith, he continued to practice it after
release [Q58].  Again, at Q64 the Appellant explains how the police
regularly came to his house and told him to give up his religion
(therefore, trying to discourage him from practicing his religion).
However, this did not discourage him from his faith [Q65].  The Appellant
has been clear and consistent with his evidence in this respect.

Version 1.0, February 2020 sets out a clear example of family members being
arrested and detained together (�5.4.1).  The same guidance also sets out
the family will be arrested if they try to resist when police try to stop
gatherings and confiscate vehicles (�5.2.7).  This indicates that family
members are considered as one unit for the purpose of perceived activities
against the state.

The Appellant would not be able to hide his connection with his father on
return to Vietnam because of the Ho Khau (household registration) system,
which is related to social benefits and medical care.  There is no reason
why the Appellant becoming an adult would make him any less connected with
his father, and his father's activities.  It is likely to be assumed that
Appellant continues to follow the same religion as his family, and this
religion is seen to be opposed to the government.

Furthermore, the Appellant has partaken in demonstrations in the United
Kingdom, which demonstrates his ongoing commitment to promoting democracy
in Vietnam.

Again, the Appellant's evidence must be assessed in light of his young age
at the time of these events.  The Appellant raised forced labour whilst
abroad in his first interview [Q2.5].  He was kept by his agent in China
for two years and carried out unpaid domestic work.  This is consistent
with the background information that [m]ost trafficking victims in Vietnam
are taken to China and are sold into prostitution, forced labour or
marriages with Chinese men.

In relation to the trafficking of children, there is no requirement for
there to have been any threat involved in the trafficking.  It is simply
the transportation of someone for the purpose of exploitation.  Therefore,
this meets the definition.

The Respondent does not accept that the Appellant was held against his will
in the United Kingdom.  Firstly, it was not possible for the Appellant to
raise this in his first interview in 2016 [RFRL: �8], because this was
before he was taken and held against his will.  Secondly, the Respondent
has found it implausible that the Appellant would not ask for help when he
found himself lost in the United Kingdom.  However, this ignores his age,
and that his lack of knowledge of the language and culture of the United
Kingdom might have prevented him from seeking help rather than compelling
him to do so [RFRL �10].

The Appellant has provided a plausible explanation for not raising his
kidnap with the police and not wanting to be referred to the NRM as a
victim of trafficking.  He only has experience of authorities who have
harassed, detained and beaten him.  He is a young man in an unfamiliar
country, being forced to carry out an illegal activity.  It is
understandable why he would be scared of going to the police and not aware
of the police and judicial system in the United Kingdom.

The Appellant's credibility was previously found to be damaged by his
failure to claim asylum in other safe countries that he passed through on
his way to the United Kingdom.  It is further held against him that he
failed to continue with the asylum procedure after arriving in the United
Kingdom.  If it is accepted that the Appellant is a victim of trafficking,
then this cannot be held to damage his credibility.

Even if it is not accepted that the Appellant is a victim of trafficking,
the adverse credibility finding appears to ignore the reality that he was a
child when he left Vietnam, and was still a child when he entered the
United Kingdom.  Throughout his journey he was always under the control of
an agent.  Therefore, it is unlikely that he was making the decisions about
where he travelled to, or even knew the process of how to claim asylum.
However, this is not contrary to his account that the reason he left
Vietnam was due to a fear for his life.

Even if it is not accepted that the Appellant was held against his will in
the United Kingdom, it must be remembered that he was a child when he
entered the United Kingdom having been through a long (and likely
difficult) journey to the United Kingdom.  He was alone in a country he did
not know.  However, he was not treated as a child, despite the Respondent
only considering him to be 11 months older than he really is.  Furthermore,
it is far more likely that he was born on 9 November 1998, rather than 1
January 1998 (a day a month of birth often given to asylum seekers who do
not know the day and month of their birth).

However, he did bring himself to the attention of the authorities after
receiving assistance from a Vietnamese woman in the United Kingdom who
assisted him to find a solicitor.  This suggests that he did so when he
felt safe to.  Therefore, given his young age, this should not damage his
credibility.

Should the Appellant return he would attend the ceremonies.  The First-tier
Tribunal did not accept that the Appellant had been caught distributing
leaflets, but not that they did not distribute leaflets.  The background
material establishes poor prison conditions.  The Appellant's religion is
seen as political (with reference to page 172 and 177 of the Appellant's
bundle).



Country Policy and Information Note Vietnam: Hoa Hao Buddhism Version 1.0
February 2020

"2.4 Risk

                    a. State treatment

2.4.1    The Constitution allows for freedom of religion but in practice
this is restricted. Religious groups are required to seek approval from and
register with the government, which restricts the activities of
unregistered and unrecognised religious groups and/or persons associated
with them (see Difference between registered and unregistered groups).

2.4.2    The exact number of Hoa Hao Buddhists is unknown.   Estimates
range from 1.3 million to 8 million, with around 2 million being a more
realistic number (representing just under2% of the total population).
Followers of the Hoa Hao Buddhism are almost exclusively concentrated in
the Mekong Delta region and tend to come from poor economic backgrounds
with the majority being farmers (see Demography).

2.4.3    Hoa Hao Buddhism is an officially recognised religion in Vietnam
but most Hoa Hao Buddhists refuse to belong to the state recognised group
due to the authorities 'control over this group. Some members of
unregistered Hoa Hao groups are subject to police harassment, surveillance,
confiscation of property, beatings, restrictions on movement and the
disruption of their religious activities (see State treatment of Hoa Hao
Buddhists).

2.4.4    Hoa Hao Buddhism is normally practiced at home or while tending
the land.  Where a person practices their faith at home or in a small group
cooperating with local authorities and where they or their leaders do not
get involved in political issues they are unlikely to face adverse
treatment from the authorities (see State treatment of Hoa Hao Buddhists).

2.4.5    The government is suspicious of large gatherings (over 20-25
people) and will look for ways to break them up.  People may be taken to
police stations to be asked their names and relationships, released after 3-
4 hours, and "invited" back for further questioning.  Some people may
eventually be charged with public disturbance/disrupting public order,
"conducting propaganda against the state" or traffic disruption.

2.4.6    Some members of unofficial Hoa Hao Buddhist groups have been
subjected to arrest, detention and harassment, with a small number -between
10-20 -arrested, prosecuted and imprisoned for dissent or criticising the
government.  In general this is not solely due to their faith but the
perceived threat they pose to the government due to their involvement in
political activities, such as land/environmental issues or advocating for
democracy in Vietnam or because they are deemed to pose a threat for other
reasons (see State treatment of Hoa Hao Buddhists).

2.4.7    Hoa Hao Buddhists, particularly leaders, who openly criticise the
government or participate activities that are, or may be perceived to be,
political in nature may face harassment and arrest and detention.  However,
sources indicate that there are very few people detained or imprisoned (see
State treatment of Hoa Hao Buddhists).

2.4.8    Hoa Hao Buddhists are unlikely to be at risk on return to Vietnam
and only those suspected of having a political opinion critical to the
government may be subject to monitoring (see Returns).

2.4.9    In general a person, regardless of being a member of registered or
unregistered group, who practices their faith without seeking to challenge
or criticise the state are unlikely to be at risk of treatment that amounts
to persecution or serious harm.  Persons who, however, belong to
unregistered groups and criticise or challenge the state may face state
monitoring, harassment, arrest, interrogation and torture.  Whether they
are they are at risk of persecution or serious harm will depend on their
profile and activities.  Each case on its facts with the onus on the person
to demonstrate that they would be at real risk of serious harm or
persecution from state actors on return.

2.4.10   For further information please see the country policy and
information note on Vietnam: ethnic and religious groups.

2.4.11   For further guidance on assessing risk, see the instruction on
Assessing Credibility and Refugee Status.

2.5  Protection

                Where the person has a well-founded fear of persecution from
                the state, they are unlikely to be able to avail themselves
                of the protection of the authorities.  For further guidance
                on assessing the availability of state protection, see the
                instruction on Assessing Credibility and Refugee Status.

                    State treatment of Hoa Hao Buddhists

5.1  Requirement to register

5.1.1    The World Atlas page on 'Hoahaoism (Dao Hoa Hao)' last updated in
April 2017 noted that many followers '... refuse to affiliate with the
government committee that is in charge of overseeing all activities of
Hoahaoism.  This refusal to be involved with government mandates and
administration is the cause of significant problems for Hoa Hao Buddhists.
The government has also prohibited celebrating the founder's birthday and
destroyed important religious texts.'

5.1.2    Human Rights Watch in their report covering events in 2018 stated
'Religious groups are required to get approval from, and register with, the
government, and operate under government-controlled management boards.
While authorities allow many government-affiliated churches and pagodas to
hold worship services, they ban religious activities that they arbitrarily
deem to be contrary to the "national interest," "public order," or
"national unity," including many ordinary types of religious functions.'

5.1.3    Christian Solidarity Worldwide noted in a news report from 2018
that 'Hoa Hao Buddhism is recognised by the Vietnamese government, but many
Hoa Hao Buddhists refuse to belong to the state-sponsored Hoa Hao
Administrative Council, which was established by the Vietnam Fatherland
Front, a body under the leadership of the Communist Party of Vietnam.'

5.1.4    According to a Human Rights Watch report from February 2018: 'In
1999, the Vietnamese government recognized Hoa Hao Buddhism as a religion.
However, many followers refused to join the state-sanctioned Hoa Hao
Buddhist Church.  They have been subjected to intrusive surveillance and
repression.  Every year, local police have used various means to prevent
independent Hoa Hao Buddhist followers from gathering for important events
such as the founding day of the religion or the anniversary of the death of
the Hoa Hao founder Huynh Phu So.  The authorities have repeatedly set up
barriers to block the Quang Minh pagoda in Cho Moi district (An Giang
province), which is often used by independent Hoa Hao followers for
worshipping... In recent years, there have been numerous incidents of
protest and government attacks centering on Hoa Hao believers.'

5.1.5    Diplomatic sources explained to the UK FFT that the Hoa Hao and
the Cao Dai face more scrutiny from the government and some of the tensions
they face now are borne out of the fact that they forged their own army
before 1975 and formed an allegiance with the former Southern Vietnamese
government.  The treatment of unregistered members of the Hoa Hao religion
varies from locality to locality and can be different depending on local
relationships.  Small churches such as Hoa Hao have found different ways to
cooperate with local governments and where leaders don't get involved in
political issues, they are ignored but those who take a more political
stance face more harassment.

5.1.6    The 2019DFAT report noted that: 'Like other religious groups,
followers of Buddhism (including Hoa Hao Buddhism) are divided between
those affiliated with government-sanctioned religious organisations and
those with independent groups.  DFAT understands that followers of official
Buddhist groups are generally able to practise their religion freely
without government intervention.  Followers of independent Buddhist groups,
however, including Khmer Krom, the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam
(UBCV), and unrecognised branches of Hoa Hao, reportedly face ongoing
surveillance, harassment, and occasional violence from authorities.

5.2  Banning/restrictions of religious ceremonies and/or activities

5.2.1    The 2018 USSD RIRF, stated: 'The law provides a separate process
for unregistered, unrecognized religious organizations or groups of
individuals to receive permission for specific religious activities by
submitting an application package to the commune-level people's committee.
Current regulations require the people's committee to respond in writing to
such an application within 20 working days of receipt.  The law specifies
that a wide variety of religious activities require advance approval or
registration from the authorities at the central and/or local levels.'

5.2.2    The same source further added: 'These activities include "belief
activities" (defined as traditional communal practices related to ancestor,
hero, or folk worship); "belief festivals" being held for the first time;
the establishment, split, or merger of religious affiliates; the
ordination, appointment, or assignment of religious administrators (or
clergy with administrative authority); establishment of a religious
training facility; conducting religious training classes; holding major
religious congresses; organizing religious events, preaching or
evangelizing outside of approved locations; traveling abroad to conduct
religious activities or training; and joining a foreign religious
organization... Certain religious activities do not require advance
approval, but instead require notification to the appropriate authorities.'

5.2.3    The USSD RIRF 2018 also noted 'Registered and unregistered
religious groups continued to state [that] government agencies sometimes
did not respond to registration applications or approval requests for
religious activities within the stipulated time period, if at all, and
often did not specify reasons for refusals.  Some groups reported they
successfully appealed local decisions to higher-level authorities through
informal channels.  Several religious leaders reported authorities
sometimes asked for bribes to facilitate approvals.  Authorities attributed
the delays and denials to the failure of applicants to complete forms
correctly or provide complete information.  Religious groups said the
process to register groups or notify activities in new locations was
particularly difficult.'

5.2.4    Asia News reported in August 2018 that '[...] authorities impose
strict controls on dissident groups that do not follow the official branch.
 Human rights groups argue that the authorities of An Giang persecute
followers of unapproved groups, prohibiting public reading of the sect's
founder's writings and discouraging faithful worshipers from visiting
pagodas.'

5.2.5    Hoa Hao Buddhist managers of the 'pure sect' told the FFT that
they had previously thought that the government were trying to eliminate
the religion by confiscating property and not allowing them to show
portraits of the grandmaster but now it is more relaxed for the 'neutral'
sect.  The 'pure' sect however continue to face harassment economically and
politically.  When asked whether the government only targets those
struggling for the legitimate interest i.e. the 'pure sect', the Hoa Hao
Buddhist managers said that it did not matter which sect you were from if
you were struggling for the legitimate interest but that the majority of
those who do are from the 'pure sect'

5.2.6.   The Hoa Hao Buddhist managers of the 'pure sect' were asked if
they could provide details of arrests and detentions.  They told the FFT
that where people hold gatherings in their community for ceremonies such as
weddings and funerals, they will invite the core followers to attend and
pray together.  The authorities start to worry that they will be discussing
political issues, so they ban the families from inviting other people.  The
families holding the event described this as a violation of their freedom
of religion and the government found this term offensive and charged them
with disturbing the peace.  The FFT were told of current prisoners: Vuong
Van Tha, who has been in prison since 2017 and was charged under Article 88
(propaganda against the state) and convicted for 12 years.  The other
person, Bui Van Trung, was charged for 6.5 years imprisonment for fighting
against the constabulary.  His family have been unable to meet with him and
no one knows his current situation.

5.2.7    The Hoa Hao Buddhist managers of the 'pure sect' stated that when
the invitees try to attend the gathering, they are stopped by police and
they have their papers taken away.  If they resist, then the police would
confiscate their vehicle.  If the family try to argue then the police will
view that as them trying to incite a disturbance and they start to arrest
people.

5.2.8    This kind of religious gathering scenario was also confirmed by
diplomatic sources who stated that the term 'arrested' was used liberally
in Vietnam and that often when a gathering reaches numbers above 20-25
people the police get nervous about such a big group.  The police then
bring people into the police station to get details such as their names and
relationships.  They may be there for 3-4 hours and then released with some
being issued a 'letter of invitation' to return for further questioning
later.  The citizen has the right to refuse but is likely to face
harassment.  This can go on for many months and they noted an example of a
death anniversary commemoration of some Ho Hoa Hao followers where over the
course of many months different people were brought in for different
questioning sessions.  This ultimately resulted in 6 people being charged
and sentenced for 'public disturbance' and 'traffic disruption'

7.   Returns

7.1.1    The UK FFT asked the Hoa Hao Buddhist managers of the 'pure sect'
whether in general Hoa Hao members outside of Vietnam would be at risk if
they were returned and they stated that they probably wouldn't.  They went
on to note that the government only targets those who are struggling for
the legitimate interests of the pure sect' and that if the government
thought a returnee would create a risk then they might not grant them entry
into the country or they may grant them entry and then monitor them and
escalate issues later."

The Report of a Home Office's Fact Finding mission to Vietnam, published 9
September 2019

"1.3.4   Diplomatic sources added that in other cases, such as where
arrests follow on from demonstrations, the procedures will vary depending
on circumstances, reasons for the arrest and the individuals involved, and
numbers involved and the perceived threat, including political threat that
the person arrested is deemed to pose.  There have been numerous reports of
activists and demonstrators arrested or detained without an arrest warrant,
sometimes under broad interpretations of the emergency custody/security
provisions.  There are also reports of police frequently using excessive
force when making an arrest."

Findings

The maintained finding of the First-tier Tribunal is that the Appellant and
his mother were not caught distributing leaflets. I do not go behind this.
I had the benefit of hearing oral evidence.  I found that the Appellant was
on the whole credible.  His account is supported by the background
evidence. While the RFRL refers to inconsistencies in the Appellant's
screening interview on 17 April 2016 because he made reference to a land
dispute with the Vietnamese government, I am satisfied that this is not
discrepant with his claim that the family home was confiscated.  In
addition, I take into account that what was said is in the contest of a
screening interview over the telephone.

The evidence relating to the Appellant's father's arrest and imprisonment
and the confiscation of the family home is entirely consistent with the
background material.  I accept that the Appellant's father was a religious
leader and anti- government literature was found at the family's home
following the execution of a search warrant. I find that the Appellant and
his mother were arrested (in 2012) and released having signed a
declaration.  This is all entirely consistent with the CPIN (see 2.4.3-
2.4.9, 5.1.4, 5.2.6-5.2.8).  There is no good reason brought to my
attention to doubt what the Appellant says about his father.  The Appellant
has good reason, considering the background evidence, to believe that his
father was killed rather than dying in prison of natural causes.  While
there is no independent corroboration specifically relating to his father
it is difficult to see what evidence could have been obtained by the
Appellant.  I also take on board Mr Tufan's reference to 2.4.6 of the CPIN
about the number of people arrested, but I accept Ms Child's point that the
figure is not in context.  Considering the background evidence as a whole,
it supports that arrests take place.

The First-tier Tribunal did not accept the Appellant's evidence that he was
arrested with his mother for distributing leaflets.  There is nothing in my
view incredible about the Appellant's account that he delivered anti-
government leaflets particularly in the light of what had happened to the
family and particularly to his father, albeit he was not caught or
arrested.

In respect of his own activities, having heard his evidence, I accept that
if the Appellant returned to Vietnam, he would continue to practice his
religion as an unregistered Hoa Hoa Buddhist.  This would not necessarily
put him at risk.  The background evidence does not support that all
unregistered Hoa Hoa Buddhists are at risk per se.  I accept that the
Appellant and his mother distributed leaflets which were anti-government.
In the light of his religion and what happened to his father, it is
credible that the Appellant would wish to continue his efforts to fight for
freedom of religion.  He has been on demonstrations in the United Kingdom
fighting for religious freedom albeit he has no prominent role as an
activist.  I accept that he is not able to practise his religion here as
openly as he would wish to because he does not know other pure Hoa Hoa
Buddhists with whom he can worship and attend ceremonies. However, I find
that he does what he can.  He attends a non Hoa Hoa Buddhist temple in
Croydon every month where he lights a candle on the ceremony days.  There
were no witnesses to support the Appellant's account.  However, that he is
pure Hoa Hoa Buddhist is not in dispute.  Ms Vuoang did not attend the
hearing; however, she is not pure Hoa Hoa and neither are the worshippers
in the temple.

There is no obvious reason why the Appellant did not call witnesses with
whom he has demonstrated, but there was no dispute that he was on those
demonstrations.  Having heard the Appellant give evidence, it was apparent
to me that he is isolated here in the United Kingdom and unable to practise
his religion with others as he would wish because of the lack of a pure Hoa
Hoa community with whom to worship.  Considering his evidence overall, I do
not find that the absence of corroborative evidence about his activities in
the United Kingdom undermines his credibility.

I accept that the Appellant was trafficked to China.  There is much
background evidence that would support the trafficking of Vietnamese
nationals to China.  His account of being in a debt bondage position is
credible.  The Appellant's journey here is not out of the ordinary.  There
is no good reason to disbelieve it. I accept that there is no clear
explanation of how the Appellant became estranged from the
trafficker/agent, who would have had a financial interest in remaining
close to him, on arrival to the United Kingdom.  However, this is not the
core of the Appellant's account and I do not find that it damages his
credibility.  The Appellant gives an account of being kidnapped and working
on a cannabis farm. Being forced to work on a cannabis farm is entirely
credible.  He made an NRM claim which he later withdrew.  I understand from
the RFRL that the Appellant refused to sign a NRM form in his interview.
He also denied in his screening interview that he had been trafficked.  He
has expressed fear for his mother's safety and of the police here because
of his engagement in illegal activity.  His fear is rational and logical.
His reluctance to disclose the whole story which may identify others is
understandable.  His reluctance to report matters to the police is
credible.  His behaviour is not unusual for a genuine victim of
trafficking.  His conduct does not undermine his credibility.  I have taken
s.8 of the 2004 Act into account, but do not find that the Appellant's
failure to make an asylum application in another safe country or that he
"absconded" after he made a claim for asylum undermines his credibility.

After the Appellant's father's death, he and his mother continued to
practice their religion.  This in itself would not put them at risk.
However, they engaged in the distribution of anti-government leaflets. This
could have put them at risk.  I accept that he would wish to continue
practising his religion in Vietnam with others of the same faith.  This
would for the Appellant involve attending gatherings, ceremonies ( at 5.2.6
of the CPIN it is documented that Hoa Hoa Buddhist managers of the pure
sect told the FFT where there are gatherings, the authorities start to
worry the participants start to discuss political issues) and engaging in
anti-government activity including the distribution of anti-government
leaflets which I find is part of his religious practise in Vietnam.  The
Appellant is now an adult.  He believes his father was killed by the
authorities.  I find that he would wish to continue his fight for freedom
of religion on return.  This would put him at risk of arrest and detention.
 Applying the lower standard of proof and considering the background
evidence (see 2.4.5, 2.4.6, 2.4.7, 2.4.9 of CPIN, 1.3.4 FFM report) I am
satisfied that the Appellant's religious practice would be perceived as
political.  While the CPIN does not support that many people have been
arrested, it clearly establishes that there are arrests.  The 2018 Human
Rights Watch Report at p177 of the Appellant's bundle says that 129 people
are imprisoned for expressing critical views of the government, taking part
in peaceful protests, participating in religious groups not approved by the
authorities, or joining civil or political organisations.  At 5.2.6 of the
CPIN current prisoners are named.  The 2019 Human Rights Report at p 163
paints a grim picture of Vietnam's human rights record as regards
dissidents and followers of independent religious groups.  The Appellant in
oral evidence said that he would not be arrested because of his father's
activities.  I find that his own activities would put him at risk.  If he
is arrested, his family background and previous arrest are reasonably
likely to be additional risk factors.

I am satisfied that the background evidence supports that the Appellant
would practise his religion openly in Vietnam which would be perceived as
political anti-government activity because he would fight for freedom of
religion.  If he chose not to, this would be because he wants to avoid
persecution.  Thus, properly applying HJ (Iran), the Appellant is a refugee
in need of international protection.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 3 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
