

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12789/2018 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at George House, Edinburgh            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|by Skype for Business                       |On 17 December 2020            |
|on 9 December 2020                          |                               |
|                                            |                               |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    [A N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms J Blockley, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, came to the UK as a visitor on  14
    April 2018.  She sought asylum on 1 May 2018, based on  the  risk  that
    the family of her late husband would enforce FGM  on  her  and  on  her
    daughter, and would force her and  her  daughter  into  marriage.   The
    respondent refused her claim

 2. FtT Judge Handley  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 July 2019.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on grounds which  in  outline
    are as follows:

      2.1 Account of alleged persecution: (First) it is unclear  what  judge
      did or did not believe; (Second) this failure is not saved by [47]  of
      the decision, where the appellant's claim  to  have  "no  choice"  was
      found not credible; (Third) evidence from a friend of  the  appellant,
      going to the core issue, is left out of account.

      2.2 Sufficiency of protection: on approaching the authorities,  it  is
      unclear if it was accepted that the appellant went to the  police  and
      social work department;  the  objective  evidence  is  not  enough  to
      establish sufficiency of protection, if  a  person  does  so;  it  was
      perverse at [45] to find  that  there  was  no  evidence   about  high
      ranking officers; "ample evidence " is  cited  of  many  high  ranking
      members of the military in late husband's family.

      2.3 Internal relocation: the test needs to be revisited  in  light  of
      evidence cited in the previous ground.

      2.4 Best interests of children: the return of a 12 year old  child  is
      not necessarily in her best interests, even if the parent's return  is
      inevitable; no reasons were given on this issue.

 4. The FtT and the UT refused permission.  The  appellant  petitioned  the
    Court of Session for reduction of the refusal by the UT.  The  petition
    was settled in terms of a joint minute, agreeing:

      FIRST: that the UT erred in law in considering  whether  the  FTT  had
      erred in law because:


      (i) The FTT left out of account evidence which may have had a material
      bearing on whether the petitioner would be at risk on  return  to  her
      home country after April 2018; being the email dated 5th December 2018
      from Toyin Aladeusi ...;


      (ii) The FTT left out of account  or  failed  properly  to  take  into
      account evidence which may have had a material  bearing  not  only  on
      whether the petitioner would be at risk on return to her home country,
      but  also  in  relation  to  whether  she  would  receive   sufficient
      protection or whether she could internally relocate if returned to her
      home country; being photographic and other evidence bearing  upon  the
      position of the petitioner's late husband's family in Nigeria ...


      SECOND: that the UT's error is material as it may  be  arguable  that,
      had the evidence referred to in (i) and (ii)  above  been  taken  into
      account by the FTT, the petitioner's appeal would have succeeded.

 5. On 5 August 2020, the Vice President of the UT  granted  permission  in
    light of the joint minute and the interlocutor of the Lord Ordinary.

 6. The case accordingly came before me on 9 December  2020.   I  conducted
    the   hearing   from   George   House.    The   appellant,   and   both
    representatives,  attended  remotely.   The   technology   enabled   an
    effective hearing.

 7. Points (i) and (ii) are both within the original grounds, although  not
    focused quite as clearly as in the joint minute.

 8. The evidence mentioned at (i), the email,  is  not  referenced  in  the
    decision.   I agree with the submission by Mr Avery that this  omission
    does not constitute an error of law.  The appellant  placed  voluminous
    documentary evidence before the  FtT.   Judges  do  not  have  to  deal
    specifically with every item.  It was not shown that  the  email  added
    anything of such significance as to require separate treatment.

 9.  On  point  (ii),  there  was  evidence  before  the   FtT,   including
    photographs,  a  funeral   order   of   service,   names,   ranks   and
    identifications, which the appellant advanced to support her claim that
    her late husband and many of his  relatives  held  high  ranks  in  the
    Nigerian military.  I was not persuaded by Mr Avery that  it  could  be
    read into the decision that this evidence had been considered.  Rather,
    the terms of the decision at [45] and [46] show that it was overlooked.
     This matter was at the centre of the claim.  The oversight amounts  to
    an error of law, such that the adverse credibility  conclusions  cannot
    safely stand.

10. Ms Blockley made submissions on other alleged errors in  the  decision,
    not included in the joint minute or in the original grounds.  I was not
    persuaded that the scope of the UT's consideration should  be  widened,
    and I tend to agree with the submission  by  Mr  Avery  that  no  other
    errors were disclosed.  As the outcome on the main point argued for the
    appellant is a fresh hearing, it is not  necessary  to  consider  those
    other matters any further.

11. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and stands only as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  Under section 12 of the  2007  Act,  and
    under Practice Statement 7.2, the case is remitted to  the  FtT  for  a
    fresh hearing.  The member(s) of the FtT chosen to  consider  the  case
    are not to include Judge Handley.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      10 December 2020
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
