
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00159/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Skype for Business at Field House|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 July 2020                            |On 18 August 2020               |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     GM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey, instructed by Oaks Solicitors
(Rowlandson House)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal comes before us as a consequence of remittal to the Upper
Tribunal from the Court of Appeal as set out in the Court's order of 30
January 2020.  It is clear from paragraph 8 of the statement of reasons
that the earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal of 3 June 2019 was set
aside and the matter was remitted for reconsideration.

2.   In brief, the appellant is a citizen of Kosovo, born in 1972, who
first came to the United Kingdom in 1991 and was granted asylum in 1997
followed by indefinite leave to remain in 1999.  He has a longstanding
partner, VD, who is also from Kosovo but is now a British citizen, and they
have twin daughters, V1 and V2, born in the United Kingdom on 27 May 2006,
who are also British citizens.

3.   Following the appellant's conviction in July 2016 for conspiracy to
steal, he was sentenced to 27 months' imprisonment.  On 21 August 2017 a
decision was taken to cease the appellant's refugee status and refuse his
human rights claim.  On 28 October 2017 a deportation order was signed and
was sent with full reasons on 30 October 2017.  The appeal to the First-
tier Tribunal was successful, but that decision was overturned by the Upper
Tribunal in a decision which was itself set aside by the Court of Appeal.

4.   The essential issue before us is whether it would be unduly harsh for
the appellant's partner and children to remain in the United Kingdom
without the appellant.  We will set out the relevant legal provisions in
detail later in this decision.

5.   We heard oral evidence from three witnesses.  The first was the
appellant's sister IM, who made a statement dated 17 July 2020.  She was
content for this to be her evidence before the Tribunal.  Ms Harvey had a
few supplementary questions.

6.   The witness said that she lived with her mother and looked after her
each week and all her spare time was spent with her.  As to whether her
mother could manage without her, it was very difficult, as she had set out
in her statement.  Her mother had various health issues and was getting
worse, so she needed quite a bit of help.  She had arthritis and sight
problems and was aged 76.  The appellant provided support for her and for
her mother.  They were a close-knit family and spent every Sunday together
and whenever he was needed the appellant was around and specifically when
she herself was away he was around to help their mother.

7.   She was sure he would not reoffend because they were very well brought
up and educated and whatever happened it was very unprecedented for their
family.  He did not need to offend.

8.   As to what support she would be able to provide in the future she said
that at the time when her brother was incarcerated his release was imminent
and she gave support to her nieces and all the family were affected.  He
was going to be coming back to his family and they had done their best but
it was difficult.  She was not a parent.  She had full-time work and her
job was very demanding and she also had to look after her mother.  She
thought that if the appellant were removed to Kosovo the girls would
deteriorate.  They relied strongly on his love and support and presence as
set out in her statement.  Their fears were already very evident and it
would be a nightmare for them.  As to the effect on the appellant's wife
she was very gentle and suffered from depression and it would be back to
square one with her fears.  They were a very loving family and his wife
would not be able to live without him.  They were very close and she needed
him and could not cope with the children by herself.

9.   On cross-examination the witness was asked whether there was any
indication of deterioration in the children's schoolwork or activities
since the deportation notice and she said yes, they had become very
emotional and fearful and questioning.  They had a fear of abandonment and
looked up to the appellant.  It was put to her that there was no evidence
of their schoolwork suffering since the Home Office's decision, and she
said they saw it as something that needed to be done and they carried on
with it.  It was unclear what would happen to them.  They would have no
male figure for strong support.

10.  It was put to her that the appellant's wife travelled quite regularly
to Albania or Kosovo without her husband for lengthy periods and she was
asked how that related to her saying that they could not be apart.  She
said that when the appellant's wife visited her sister it was a holiday and
was different, there was no comparison.  She had gone once in the school
holidays.  They had not gone last year.  The last time was the summer of
2018 for four or five weeks to visit her sister.  She was asked whether the
appellant's wife had coped then and said it was a visit to family and only
for a short while.

11.  There was no re-examination.

12.  The next witness was the appellant, who adopted his statement.  Again,
Ms Harvey had a few further questions for him.

13.  He was asked how he could be confident that he would not offend again
and he said that he had made a mistake and admitted it and was remorseful
and could only look ahead.  He had caused hurt and pain to all dear to him
and he would not put them through it again.

14.  He was referred to correspondence from his employer in the bundle and
said that he had told them exactly what had happened and showed them all
the paperwork and that he was on bail with an uncertain future.  They had
taken him back afterwards, having told him before sentencing that they were
willing to employ him on his return.  He had applied to be allowed to work
and they had taken him back.  His employer had said it was out of character
for him to be in prison.  He would be able to do what he had done before
and he had said he was not damaged and was fine to work.

15.  When he was in prison his family had visited him as often as was
allowed and he had called them every day, in the morning before school.

16.  He had not talked to the children then about him being in prison but
later on and had said why they had not told them, as they were shielding
them.  They were only 10 when he went to prison.  He thought that they had
seen signs such as barbed wire and guards and then they tried to brush it
off and it was easier then but they had been aware.

17.  He was asked what support he thought his wife would have and he said
there would be none.  She was very special and needed help in everyday life
and struggled with the security part of life.  When he was away she had
jammed chairs under the door handles.  She was very insecure when he was
not around and it affected her emotional state.  Also there would be
financial issues as she could not work all the time and needed time with
the children.  He had always provided most of the income.

18.  He was asked who could help her and said there was no-one in their
life.  You found out in hard times and everyone had their own issues.  His
sister had tried before.  There would not be any support from anyone.  He
was asked what he thought would happen to them and he said insecurity,
financial problems and it would be quite detrimental.  His wife had grown
up without her mother and separated from her siblings.  She would suffer a
lot and the girls would be lost.  They saw him as their idol.  In lockdown
there had been no signs of deterioration: there had been major improvement
and it was not to his credit: one of his children had achieved the highest
achievement points for her house in school.

19.  On cross-examination the appellant confirmed that they always had a
big family dinner on Sundays and that it was like a religious event and it
was at his mother's.  Her house was three minutes' drive away.  They had
discussed the impending deportation.  He was asked why he thought his
sister, who had helped his wife previously, could not do so again if
needed.  He said that is was a matter of physical presence.  She would not
be in their house and also work took her away and she lived her life and
had no children and was not married and valued her freedom.  She did not
want a burden in her life.  She knew she could not replace the parents and
offered temporary distractions over a fourteen month period and then he had
returned.  She could not and would not do it for a long period.

20.  He agreed that his sister had financed his wife's trip to Kosovo in
2018.  He had not been able to travel.  It was a treat and it was the
cheapest way and they had stayed with an aunt.  It was put to him that his
wife and children had gone to Kosovo in ten out of fourteen years and he
said it was not regular and it was a stopover to the seaside and there were
cheaper holidays in Albania.  He was asked whether they usually spent four
weeks and he would come for a week or two and he said it was more than the
final week for him and it depended on when he could get a holiday.  Their
tickets were bought well in advance as they were cheaper and his were at
the last minute, so more expensive.  It was put to him that he said his
wife could not be without him but she had spent lengthy periods in the last
decade being all right and he said they were not lengthy periods but a week
or two.  The trip in 2018 was to treat the girls.  It should be contrasted
with a separation for a lifetime and there was no comparison.

21.  Ms Harvey had no re-examination.

22.  The final witness was the appellant's partner, VD.  She adopted her
statement as her evidence-in-chief.

23.  As regards what she had said in her statement about her husband not
reoffending she said it was because she knew him very well and had seen his
remorse and regret and was totally sure he would not do it again.  When he
was in prison and she visited with the girls they had not talked to them
about him being in prison.  The girls had asked but they had been trying to
protect them.  She was trying to buy time.  She had told them she would
explain when they grew up.  They talked about it now and knew that he had
been a prisoner and that he had made a very stupid mistake.  They loved him
so much.  He fulfilled all her needs and she was so secure with him and
still could not believe his mistake.  She said that everyone deserved a
second chance and he was the best father that she had ever seen and did not
know what she would do without him and how she would support the children.

24.  She was referred to the fact that Dr King had recommended counselling
and she had had some and there was a waiting list.  She said she had
explained everything to Dr King and that it helped for the moment but she
still needed it ongoing.  It helped on a day-to-day basis rather than with
regard to her whole life.

25.  If her husband were removed there was no-one on whom she could call
for support.  She had no parents and was not very close to her sisters and
her mother-in-law was very old.  Her sister-in-law had her own life.

26.  She said that sometimes she helped with her husband's mother but not
much, as she had to deal with her own life.  The girls had missed him a lot
previously and one of them had suffered anxiety and cried at bedtime and
they felt very secure with him and he was like a hero to them.  His English
was better than hers, so he helped with homework and activities.  He made a
good atmosphere in their family.  She did not believe she could support
them on her own.  It had been very hard before but they had known he was
coming back and if he were not then she did not think she could cope with
that.  She was experiencing constant and increasing anxiety and she did not
want her children to grow up without parents.

27.  In cross-examination the witness was asked whether she had any friends
from the jobs she had done and said she did not.  As regards the parents of
other children when they were carrying out activities she said they took
and collected and used to meet people at the park but not on an ongoing
basis.  As regards her work colleagues she had never gone out with them and
it was for work and not for her social life.

28.  Her sister in the United Kingdom lived in London and she had not seen
her for three or four years.  They had never been close and had grown
apart.  They had come to the United Kingdom together and their relationship
was all right at the start but in time her sister became very difficult and
got upset with her all the time and it was from her sister's side and not
hers.

29.  Her sister in Kosovo visited the United Kingdom sometimes.  She was
closer to her than the other sister but not in comparison to some siblings.
 They had not grown up together and had never been attached to each other.
Her sister lived in Kosovo with her family and she lived in the United
Kingdom.  Her sister had health problems including being overweight.  She
had not talked to her while her husband was in prison and she had no
support.

30.  It was put to her that she had visited her sister in 2018, and she
said that when her husband came out of prison her sister had contacted her
and they had picked up again.  They were not very close.  They perhaps
spoke once a month or two months.  She probably spoke to her brother once
or twice a year.  As she had said, she had not had contact with her other
sister for three or four years.  She saw her mother-in-law and her
husband's sister every Sunday mostly.  The children came too.  They were a
very close-knit family and she was very close with her husband's family.
His mother was very old and his sister worked long hours and looked after
their mother.

31.  She was asked what had changed from their earlier support when her
husband was in prison and she said that was different as it was for a year,
in contrast to the rest of one's life.  Her mother-in-law was getting older
and more tired and her sister-in-law had a job and an independent life.
Although they were close to them they could not replace her husband.  They
lived twenty minutes' walk away, close by.

32.  She had not had contact with Social Services when her husband was in
prison.  She did not want medication.  She had tried not to get support and
had ticked off the days for a year.  She begged that he be not removed as
he was all that she had and he would not do it again.

33.  She was currently taking Citalopram, having begun in the summer of
2018.  It was put to her that there was nothing in her medical records to
show she had problems before 2018 and she was asked whether it was fair to
say that the problems diagnosed by the GP were solely with regard to her
husband's immigration matter rather than underlying health matters.  She
said that she had never needed to take antidepressants before.  She had not
been able to cope and she had gone to the GP.  The dose had increased.  She
was getting help including offers of medical help now and hoped that they
would be able to reopen soon.  The GP had referred her to iCope (community
psychology) and they thought she needed longer help.  They thought she
needed a longer treatment.

34.  It was put to her that she had known since 2016 that deportation was
intended and she was asked whether there was any reason why she had not had
treatment before 2018.  She said that she had been trying to cope herself.
She had not had experience of going to court, it was very difficult for her
and she could see she was going to crack.

35.  On re-examination, with regard to the GP's letter of 2 July 2020 in
the bundle, she was asked why she had not wanted medication.  She said it
was as it was addictive and she was a weak person.  They were chemicals and
not good for you.  She had studied medicine for two and a half years in
Kosovo until everything was closed and she had come to the United Kingdom.

36.  With regard to her sister-in-law she said she was a lovely girl but
worse than the witness at taking responsibility and hence she had no
children and was not married.  Therefore, she believed her sister-in-law
when she said that she could not look after the children.  She could hardly
look after her mother.

37.  On questions from us the appellant agreed that she and her siblings
were brought up separately.  It was fair to say with regard to support
networks and friendships that she had no close friends beyond the family.

38.  In his submissions Mr Melvin relied on the refusal letter of 2017 and
his written submissions and the skeleton argument.  The issue was quite a
narrow one: whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife and
children to remain in the United Kingdom if he was removed to Kosovo.  The
evidence today had emphasised the appellant's wife's inability to cope if
he was removed and it was said to be detrimental to her health and that of
the children.  On behalf of the respondent it was argued that the evidence
did not bear out that the high threshold set out in the undue harshness
test was crossed.  The appellant's sister said his children's health had
deteriorated or would do so but that was not borne out by them or by the
school.  It was accepted that they would be distressed, but there was no
evidence of medication or treatment or health issues in respect of their
father's removal.  He had been released on licence in 2017.  The evidence
was wildly exaggerated with regard to the effects on the wife and children.

39.  It was accepted that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship
with his partner and children and he was a good father but that was not
sufficient.  His partner's evidence did not fit well with the close-knit
family evidence.  She said no-one would support her, but the family had
done so in the past and there had not been any Social Services involvement.
 There had been no real attempt with regard to medication until the
deportation hearings began in 2018.  It was only after the error of law
hearing in January 2019 that a psychologist had been employed, at Counsel's
recommendation.  Before 2014 there was little or no evidence of medical or
mental health problems for the appellant's partner and little before his
trial or imprisonment.  She was on medication in respect of her anxiety and
solely with regard to his immigration situation.  There was no direct issue
with the credibility of the relationship, but their evidence was
exaggerated and not in line with the facts.

40.  With regard to the expert evidence there was the report from Dr King,
the psychologist, which pointed more to a personality disorder and a
recommendation with regard to very expensive treatment for this and it
would take up to two years.  It was rebuttal evidence that had only been
instigated in 2019.  On behalf of the respondent it was argued that the
support was not likely to be withdrawn.  It should be contrasted with the
evidence of the regular holiday visits to Kosovo to be with family members,
with the partner going with the children and the appellant joining them
later.  Even with the deportation pending it had been for a considerable
period of time.  In contrast with the evidence of Dr King, set out at pages
107 to 108 of the bundle, there were the regular trips to Kosovo and
evidence of her anxiety, for example what the appellant said about her
jamming a chair under a door handle when he was not there.  This was
contradictory.

41.  With regard to the independent social worker's report, medication had
been prescribed for the appellant's partner and counselling recently but
none of this had taken place before Ms Deacon's report of 4 June 2018.
Little weight was given to the extensive findings including with regard to
the wife's mental health and that of the children.  Ms Deacon was not a
psychiatrist and was not medically trained and the point of making a
comparison to the death of a parent was extreme.

42.  Her addendum report of February 2019 expressed concerns about
emotional instability with references to the appellant's partner needing to
leave her job but this should be contrasted with her working previously.
She could drive and she could take the children to after school activities.
 The school records did not bear out the claimed problems for the children.
 They were doing very well academically.  Little weight should be attached
to the report.  The Tribunal had the evidence with regard to the
prescription.  The case law had been put in and the test was one of undue
severity or bleakness.  This case did not cross the threshold, indeed it
came nowhere near.  The appeal should be dismissed.

43.  In her submissions Ms Harvey referred to her detailed skeleton, which
she would highlight picking up points from the evidence.  There was
agreement as to the test in this case concerning the effect on the family
and whether it would be unduly harsh and then whether there were very
compelling circumstances over and above, so the human rights of all had to
be considered at that point.

44.  The best interests of the children were key and they had written
letters which were at pages 77 and 78 of the bundle.  There were two
parallel issues, the surface diagnosis of the family and the deep history
informing understanding of the family's situation.

45.  With regard to the claimed exaggeration by the appellant's sister it
was relevant to note her qualifications as set out at paragraph 5 of her
statement.  She had studied counselling and psychotherapy as a part-time
student and received a diploma in integrative counselling and psychotherapy
and had worked as a volunteer counsellor at Westminster Adult Education
Service.  She was not held out as an expert, but these were not the
comments of a person lacking understanding of the dynamics of the issue.

46.  The appellant's partner was the survivor of her mother's murder by her
father.  Her siblings had been older and she had been brought up by her
grandparents, unaware of the family history until she was 10.  She had been
halfway through a medical degree when she had to flee to the United Kingdom
with a sister and that relationship had subsequently fallen apart.

47.  There was the expert and the family evidence.  The family was
extremely functional, but the question was, if the appellant were taken out
of the picture, the effect on his partner.  It was the case that Counsel
had advised the commissioning of a psychologist's report on the basis of a
need identified because of the extreme facts.  Dr King had been accepted as
an expert and she set out her workings and described all the tests she had
done and the basis for her diagnosis.  There was reference at paragraph 1.2
of the report to the appellant's partner being thought to be at genetic
risk of developing enduring mental health concerns.  At paragraph 1.3 there
were recommendations for therapeutic intervention which would be long-term
and needed to be for at least two years.  The appellant's partner had never
had the sort of work that was thought to be needed.  She carried baggage
but it was a highly functional family unit.  There were the circumstances
of not telling the children about their father being in prison despite
visits and the children had taken on huge responsibility for their mother's
mental health.  The appellant's partner had said she did not want
counselling on Skype as she did not want her children upset.  There was a
risk of meltdown as before and an inability to look after the children.
What was said by Dr King at paragraph 3 of the opinion section of the
report was prescient with regard to her employer being unlikely to tolerate
bad days for any length of time.  That was what had happened.

48.  There were then the reports of Ms Deacon of 2018 and 2019.  The
children were coming up to their GCSE years.  They were identified as high
achievers and they were at risk of losing the protective factor of their
school.  There was reference in the addendum report to social care and
assistance available to the family.  As regards the point made by Mr Melvin
that this was old evidence, the underlying problems had not been addressed
and the appellant had been back for three years, so it was normal for them
to have him at home.  So the expert evidence was that the appellant's
partner would not be able to cope if he were deported and would not be able
to look after the children.  They would go from being a high-functioning
family unit to not functioning.  This met the undue harshness test.

49.  With regard to the "without more" point in Imran, there was also the
next line "we emphasise ..." and that was the "without more".  Reference
was made to paragraph 82 of the skeleton.  There was nothing ordinary about
the wife's history of trauma, also she had been a refugee, and that
supplied the "without more" and met the test.

50.  If the Tribunal disagreed then it was necessary to consider Article 8
at large and very compelling circumstances.  Reference was made to the
guidance in NA (Pakistan).  The appellant had lived in the United Kingdom
for 29 years, since the age of 18, having come as a refugee.  The
relationship had been formed when he had ILR, so it was not precarious.
All his family had fled, and his mother was very dependent on him, as could
be seen from her evidence, and the evidence also set out the role of the
appellant's sister in respect of their mother.  It would be hard for her
without the appellant and there were only three old aunts otherwise in
Kosovo.  There was evidence in the bundle from the IOM about returns to
Kosovo, very high unemployment, very low salaries and lack of social
security benefits in general unless there was disability or old age.  The
appellant would not be able to help the family and he would need their
help.  The test was met if one took all their rights together.  On all the
evidence he was remorseful and faced up to his crimes and told his employer
what had happened, while he was on bail.  He had made efforts to make
amends, as could be seen from his evidence and there was no risk of future
offending.  He was fully integrated in the United Kingdom and could and
would provide for himself and there would be no need for benefits.  As
regards the public interest there was little to favour deportation.  The
appeal should be allowed.

51.  We reserved our decision.

52.  As the parties agree, the issue in this case is whether it would be
unduly harsh for the appellant's partner and children to remain in the
United Kingdom if he is returned to Kosovo.  This arises as a consequence
of section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It is
made clear there at (3) that in the case of a foreign criminal who has not
been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
public interest requires his deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
applies.

53.  Under (5) Exception 2 applies where the appellant has a genuine and
subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
his deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

54.  As we have noted above, it is accepted that the appellant has a
genuine and subsisting relationship with both his partner and his children
and therefore the applicability of the undue harshness test in this case is
the main issue that we have to consider.  We also, however, have to
consider, as Ms Harvey pointed out, whether there exist very compelling
circumstances such as to render the appellant's removal from the United
Kingdom contrary to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

55.  It is clear from what was said by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)
[2018] UKSC 53, that the test of undue harshness is a high test involving a
degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any
child faced with the deportation of a parent.  In Patel [2020] UKUT 45
(IAC), it was noted that nationality (in the form of British citizenship)
is a relevant factor when assessing whether the "unduly harsh" requirements
of section 117C(5) are met.  It is, however, not necessarily a weighty
factor.  All depends on the facts.  Thus, it was said, some substantial
interference with the rights and expectations that come with being British
is possible, without the position becoming one of undue harshness to the
child.

56.  Undue harshness in this case is argued with respect to the appellant's
daughters on the basis of the situation of their mother, who came to the
United Kingdom as a refugee from Kosovo and the survivor of the murder of
her mother by her father in her presence (albeit as a small baby).  There
is a thorough and detailed psychological report by Dr Tracy King, in her
report dated 2 April 2019.  Dr King concludes that the appellant's wife
suffers from dependent personality disorder, avoidant personality style and
schizoid personality style.  Clinical syndromes are suggested by her
profile in the areas of major depression (recurrent, severe) and
generalised anxiety disorder.  It is said that she is unusually dependent,
self-effacing and non-competitive.  She is dependent and vulnerable if
separated from those who provide support and likely to resent those on whom
she must depend if they are critical or disapproving.  She has an isolated
and distorted sense of self along with dysphoric and fatalistic thoughts
and these are said to be highly indicative of a major depressive disorder
for VD.  She is highly anxious and this is in all life circumstances, is
apprehensive every day and has somatic signs of insomnia, exhaustion and
aches and pains.  She is inclined to lean on others for support and under
stress may claim that even the simplest of responsibilities are too
demanding.  It is said that her early life experiences have led to
fragmented personality formation and this would require long-term treatment
of at least two years to offer a fair/good prognosis for change and until
her personality is stabilised she will be at high risk of frequent mental
health destabilisation that would impact her care of the children.  It is
said that even after treatment to some degree she will be at risk of
relapses in mental health concerns given her age and point of treatment.

57.  Dr King considers that as a first step it would be advisable to
implement methods to ameliorate her current state of clinical anxiety,
depressive hopelessness and difficult aspects of her personality
functioning by therapeutic intervention.  The appropriate treatment is less
likely to be available on the NHS and may have to be sourced privately and
self-funded.  Fees would be in the region of �100 per session and she would
require at least two years' worth of weekly treatment.  Whilst her current
counselling will be supportive through her period of acute destabilisation,
she will not gain personality change or trauma processing from a
counselling approach and these are the underlying issues that maintain her
mental health concerns.  As a lone parent she would be at high risk of a
fast escalation in mental health concerns placing her children at risk of
neglect and a lack of emotional attunement.  They would also be at risk of
being isolated from the community as she would struggle to engage with
others and would be unlikely to help seek appropriately.  It is her
personality profile and mental health concerns that would escalate at the
loss of her husband to deportation.  It is said that loss to her is a
retriggering of her early traumatic losses in life and her early losses
have created a dependent need for her that is targeted solely towards her
husband.  Potentially the girls would be at risk of losing two parents, one
to deportation and one to long-term enduring mental health concerns.  Her
husband being deported is worse for her than him being in prison as the
deportation is indefinite, she cannot visit him and speak to him as
frequently due to cost implications, and concerns as to the safety of
women, particularly her children, in Kosovo.  Previously she could see him
weekly and have daily telephone contact and there was an end in sight for
them to reunite.  It is also said that given that her father was reported
to have schizophrenia she has a genetic risk of enduring mental health
concerns evolving over time.

58.  There are also two reports from Sally-Anne Deacon, an independent
social worker, the first being a best interest report for the children
dated June 2018 and the second an addendum report from 7 February 2019.  Ms
Deacon suggests that should the appellant be returned to Kosovo history
would suggest that there would be a protracted, if not permanent decline in
VD's mental health which is likely to compromise her current highly skilled
levels of parenting and that the children would not only therefore lose
their father but would experience a mother who is not as emotionally and
practically available for her children as she has always been.  Ms Deacon
in her second report refers to grave concerns she has about VD's ability to
be emotionally available to her children should her partner be removed to
Kosovo.  If her employment ceased, regular visits to Kosovo enough to
maintain the family unit and emotionally satisfy all parties would be
beyond the family's financial means.  Ms Deacon considered it to be
possible that should VD's mental health deteriorate to the extent feared,
though the family would be offered the support of social care it was also
likely due to high thresholds and issues around resourcing that once
safeguarding concerns had been eliminated the case would be closed.  She
did not consider that support from voluntary agencies would be adequate
when considering the family's potential need.

59.  There was also a letter from Dr Marcus Craven, the appellant's
partner's GP, dated 2 July 2020.  He states that she first presented to
them with symptoms of depression in July 2018 and they elected to start her
on Citalopram.  She came off it for a while but then presented in February
2019 with a significant deterioration in her symptoms and went back onto
Citalopram and was also given a short course of hypnotic medication
service.  When he saw her again in September 2019 she remained low and
anxious and they elected to increase the antidepressant medication dose.
He also notes that she accessed community psychology (iCope) with which he
understood she had had nine sessions and was referred to the women and
health counselling service of iCope where she received additional support
during a further ten sessions.

60.  From the evidence it appears to us that the family managed when the
appellant was in prison.  Support was provided to the appellant's partner
and the children by the appellant's sister.  She gave evidence before us as
noted above and as with the other two witnesses we found her evidence to be
entirely credible.  We accept that though she was able to provide some
support previously, it would be a different matter now, given the ongoing
obligations she has towards her mother, with whom she lives and whose
health is deteriorating, and her own busy life: she has a demanding job and
wishes to be independent and to live her own life.  The only support she
can provide is very limited.  VD has no contact with her sister in the
United Kingdom, and though she has visited her sister in Kosovo
periodically, of course she is as geographically remote as her partner
would be were he to be deported.

61.  We do not attach any real significance to the fact that she was able
to take the children on holiday every year for a number of years to see her
sister in Kosovo.  She was on her own with the children and with her sister
in her family household for a period of perhaps two or three weeks on each
occasion and that is a very different matter indeed from coping with a
permanent separation of the kind that is likely to be the case if the
appellant is deported.

62.  We found it significant in addition to the psychological, medical and
social work evidence that the appellant's partner in response to questions
from us said that she had no friends outside the family. We accept that. It
is consistent with Dr King's report. That may or may not be a reflection of
the very difficult childhood and upbringing she had, but it is a relevant
factor in assessing her circumstances overall.

63.  It seems to us, looking at the medical and other evidence, that the
threshold of undue harshness is crossed in this case.  The very particular
circumstances of the appellant's partner, including the tragedy of her
father murdering her mother, the fact of growing up without her siblings,
the fact of coming to the United Kingdom as a refugee and the problems
which have come to the surface in particular in light of her partner's
impending deportation, as fully set out in particular in Dr King's report,
are such, as it seems to us, to indicate that it would be unduly harsh for
her and for the children for them to be separated from the appellant.  It
is clear from Dr King's report that there is a significant risk of a
considerable deterioration in VD if her partner is removed; it appears that
the emotional dependence on the appellant is considerably greater than
would be usual, given VD's particular personality disorder. Equally, we are
satisfied that the effect on her would be significantly greater, in line
with Dr King's report.

64.   The implications of that for the children are also of clear
significance.  They coped previously and it seems probably worked out where
their father was, and they continue to cope and of course he is present in
their lives at the moment and the previous separation was, as all realised,
temporary only.  They would now be faced with a permanent separation and
living with a mother who on the evidence simply would not cope and the
implications for them would be seriously detrimental to their welfare,
there no longer being anyone else able to take a parental role.

65.  The overall conclusion we have reached about the family as a whole is
that it is the appellant's constant presence and support that underpins the
stability of VD, and consequently the children, that is the whole
family.With him permanently absent, we conclude, on the basis of the
reports provided to us, that VD will be unable to cope to such an extent
that she will not be able to support the children who will then suffer
seriously.This is a case therefore that goes in our view materially beyond
the normal consequences of deportation on a family.  In any case there is
going to be upset, heartache, unhappiness and very likely an adverse impact
on the lives of children and partners.  But in this case it goes very much
more than that in our view, to an extent where it would not just be harsh
on the children and on their mother but unduly harsh.  As a consequence we
consider that the undue harshness test is made out and the appeal is
allowed on that basis.

66.  As a consequence, we need not come to detailed  findings on Article 8
outside the Rules, although it does seem to us that as the undue harshness
test is met  it is no real step from that to find very compelling
circumstances. As Ms Harvey argued, to the evidence of undue hardship can
be added the good conduct of the appellant while in detention and
thereafter. He has shown proper remorse, has taken significant steps to
make amends, and there is no risk of re-offending. He is fully integrated
into the United Kingdom, where he has lived since 1991, has a good
employment history, and there is no indication of a need for reliance on
public funds. His presence is of real importance to the lives of not only
his children and partner but his mother also. In all the circumstances, the
very compelling circumstances test is met and the appeal is allowed on that
basis also.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 12 August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
