
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00086/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 November 2020                           |On 3 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JOLLIFFE


                                   Between

                                    M a m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction and procedural history

The Appellant is a Sudanese national, born on 1 July 1987. He is a non-Arab
Darfuri, and is a member of the Berti tribe. He entered the United Kingdom
on 28 July 2015 and applied for asylum on 29 July 2015. On 11 November
2015, he was granted refugee status and leave to remain until 10 November
2020.

On 28 August 2017, the Appellant committed two sexual offences. While drunk
and under the influence of the drug Spice, he attacked two different lone
women in west London within a short period of time and made unwanted and
forceful sexual advances on them. The first woman was able to fight him off
and run away. The second woman screamed and managed to fight him off, and
he was apprehended by passers-by. On 10 November 2017, following his guilty
plea to these offences, he was sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment for each
offence to run consecutively, coming to 4 years in total.

On 22 May 2019 the Secretary of State wrote to inform him of her intention
to revoke the grant of his refugee status under section 72 of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (hereafter, "section 72") and
Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention (hereafter, "Article 33(2)"), and
inviting him to submit any representations that he wished to make. The
letter noted at paragraph 12 that due to the potential risk to him on
return to Sudan, there was no intention to deport him at the present time.
On 1 August 2019, the UN High Commission for Refugees made representations
to the Secretary of State concerning the proposed revocation of his refugee
status.

On 6 August 2019, the Secretary of State took a decision to revoke his
refugee status. The decision stated in paragraph 2 that the Appellant had
not made any representations against the proposed revocation. It set out
the Appellant's history and the relevant legal framework for decisions to
revoke refugee status. The remarks of the judge who sentenced the Appellant
showed that the effects of his attacks were considerable, and they had
serious consequences for the victims of the attacks.

The Appellant appealed that decision.  On 5 November 2019 First Tier
Tribunal Judge Baldwin heard his appeal, and by a decision promulgated on
11 November 2019 he dismissed it. He also made an Anonymity Direction. As a
preliminary issue he considered the Appellant's application for an
adjournment because the OASys (Offender Assessment System) report indicated
that the Appellant was vulnerable, and further evidence about that was
required. The Presenting Officer opposed the application, and Judge Baldwin
refused it on the basis that the Appellant and his solicitors had had
enough time to assemble the evidence, and that it was fair and just to
proceed.

The Appellant appealed that judgment to the Upper Tribunal. By a decision
promulgated on 24 February 2020, Upper Tribunal Judges Kopieczek and Norton-
Taylor allowed the appeal on the basis that Judge Baldwin erred in law by
refusing the application for an adjournment. An expert report could have
addressed both parts of section 72(2), and could have made a difference to
the outcome of the appeal. The factual findings of Judge Baldwin would not
be preserved. The error of law decision is appended to this decision.




    Legal framework

So far as relevant, section 72 NIAA 2002 states as follows:

    72 Serious criminal

    (1) This section applies for the purpose of the construction and
    application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention (exclusion from
    protection).

    (2) A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a final
    judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to
    the community of the United Kingdom if he is-

    (a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

    (b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years.

    ...

    (6) A presumption under subsection (2), (3) or (4) that a person
    constitutes a danger to the community is rebuttable by that person.

    ...

    (9) Subsection (10) applies where-

    (a) a person appeals under section 82  of this Act or under section 2
    of the Special Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997 (c. 68) wholly
    or partly on the ground mentioned in section 84(1)(a) or (3)(a) of this
    Act (breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
    Convention), and]

    (b) the Secretary of State issues a certificate that presumptions under
    subsection (2), (3) or (4) apply to the person (subject to rebuttal).

    (10) The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal-

    (a) must begin substantive deliberation on the appeal by considering
    the certificate, and

    (b) if in agreement that presumptions under subsection (2), (3) or (4)
    apply (having given the appellant an opportunity for rebuttal) must
    dismiss the appeal in so far as it relies on the ground specified in
    subsection (9)(a).

     (10A) Subsection (10) also applies in relation to the Upper Tribunal
    when it acts under section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the Tribunals, Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007.]

Paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules concerns the exclusion of a person
from humanitarian protection:

    Exclusion from humanitarian protection



    339D. A person is excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection for
    the purposes of paragraph 339C (iv) where the Secretary of State is
    satisfied that:


    (i) there are serious reasons for considering that they have committed
    a crime against peace, a war crime, a crime against humanity, or any
    other serious crime or instigated or otherwise participated in such
    crimes;


    (ii) there are serious reasons for considering that they have guilty of
    acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations or
    have committed, prepared or instigated such acts or encouraged or
    induced others to commit, prepare or instigate such acts;


    (iii) there are serious reasons for considering that they constitute a
    danger to the community or to the security of the United Kingdom; or


    (iv) there are serious reasons for considering that they have committed
a serious crime; or


    (v) prior to their admission to the United Kingdom the person committed
    a crime outside the scope of (i) and (iv) that would be punishable by
    imprisonment were it committed in the United Kingdom and the person
    left their country of origin solely in order to avoid sanctions
    resulting from the crime.

The Court of Appeal considered section 72 and Article 33(2) in EN (Serbia)
v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 630. It held that Article 33(2) imposed two
requirements for deportation of a refugee, namely conviction for a
particularly serious crime and constituting a danger to the community, and
it did not expressly require a causal connection between the two.  The term
"particularly serious crime" in an international treaty had an autonomous
meaning and did not necessarily mean the same in each Member State, as
criminal laws varied between countries. The term should apply to what was
criminal under domestic law when deportation was considered. Not every
crime for which the criminal is sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment will be
"particularly serious" within the meaning of section 72 - see EN at [69].
At [66], the Court held that

    "Once the State has established that a person has been convicted of
    what is on the face of it a particularly serious crime, it will be for
    him to show either that it was not in fact particularly serious,
    because of mitigating factors associated with its commission, or that
    because there is no danger of its repetition he does not constitute a
    danger to the community."

Section 72 was considered in IH (s.72; 'Particularly Serious Crime')
Eritrea [2009] UKAIT 00012. At paragraph 74, the Tribunal held that:

    "Thus, the forensic investigation of whether a crime is a "particularly
    serious" one in a given case must be a struggle by the decision-maker
    (judicial or otherwise) with the facts and circumstances relating to
    the conviction and the offender. The conclusion, which is part factual
    but essentially one of judgment, must be conscientiously and rationally
    arrived at. No definitional or descriptive lexicon has been suggested
    to us that can assist further in the judicial quest for what is a
    "particularly serious crime"."

The Tribunal was also directed to the judgment in JL (medical reports -
credibility) China v SSHD [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC), and has taken account of
the principles articulated in it.




    The hearing

The hearing was scheduled for 18 November 2020. On 17 November 2020, the
Appellant's solicitors submitted by email the following documents: a
witness statement from the Appellant dated 16 November 2020; an undated
letter from Nicole Voak, a Probation Services Officer with Tower Hamlets
Probation; and an amended psychiatric dated 22 June 2020 report from Dr
Michael Shortt, a Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist. Ms Childs explained
that the psychiatric report had only been received on about 16 November
2020. Mr Lindsay pragmatically stated that he had read the documents that
morning and despite their late production he was ready to proceed.

Given Mr Lindsay's position, the Tribunal decided to admit this evidence,
despite the lateness of its production, and directed that the solicitors
should by 19 November 2020 write to explain why these documents had been
produced so late in the proceedings. In the event, an explanation was
provided and, in the circumstances, we deemed it satisfactory.  Nothing
more need be said about this.

The Tribunal decided that the Appellant should be treated as a vulnerable
witness, in light of the psychiatric report.  Thus, we have applied the
guidance set out in the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010.  It
was agreed that the issue for the Tribunal to determine was whether the
Appellant could rebut the Secretary of State's view that he should be
presumed to be a serious criminal for the purposes of section 72(2) of the
2002 Act. Mr Lindsay explained that the Secretary of State accepted that
even if the Appellant was unsuccessful in this appeal, he would in any
event not be removed for the time being because he would still be at risk
in Sudan on Article 3 grounds.  It was also accepted (in our view, rightly)
that the Appellant remained a refugee within the meaning of Article 1(2A)
of the refugee Convention by virtue of his ethnicity and the prevailing
country conditions in Sudan.

The Appellant gave oral evidence through a translator. In his witness
statements dated 26 September 2018, 11 July 2019 and 21 October 2019, he
said that he felt remorse that he had committed the criminal offences, and
had explained why he feared to return to Sudan. In his witness statement
dated 16 November 2020, he stated that because of the torture which he had
suffered in Sudan, he was sexually impotent. He was therefore confused at
having been arrested for sexual assault. He said that he would never have
committed his offences if he had been in his right mind, and expressed
regret to the women he attacked. He explained that he had been unable to
find work since his release in 2019, that because of the Covid 19 pandemic
he had been unable to register for any courses run by the Probation
Service, and that he had rediscovered his religion and now read the Qur'an.


Mr Lindsay cross-examined the Appellant. He said that he accepted he
committed the offences for which he had been convicted, but he was not
"conscious" at the time, and did not remember them. He was asked about the
recommendation in the OASys report that he should engage with necessary
drug and alcohol services and whether he had in fact done so, and he stated
that he had not done so. When asked about his attitude towards his sexual
impotence and whether he remained a risk towards women, he stated "Is there
a lion who can attack his prey without claws?" He was asked whether he
considered the attacks were not serious because he had not penetrated the
women, and he answered "Unfortunately, I cannot even rape someone". When
asked whether his crimes were serious, he replied that he would not like
someone who had done the things which he had done.

It was put to the Appellant that the OASys report said he posed a medium
risk of serious harm due to his "sexual preoccupation", but he denied that
he had any such pre-occupation. He did not accept that he was in denial, or
that he posed a risk to women. He was asked about impulsive behaviour, that
he had lost his money gambling and that shortly before he committed the
sexual assaults he smoked an unknown drug. He said that at the time had
been homeless for several months, and needed �1,500 to rent a room. A man
had told him that he could double his money through gambling, but he had
lost his money in 5 minutes. Regarding smoking an unknown drug, he stated
that he had not known it was Spice, and had only been told that in prison.
He said he took the risk of smoking it because it was offered to him by a
woman, and he felt that if she could take it, he could too.

He explained that he now lived at a hostel in Hackney, which required a
level of good behaviour from residents, including that if a resident is
seen drinking or taking drugs, he or she is at risk of being thrown out.
The hostel has both male and female residents, and he was considered safe
to be around female residents. He had previously lived in a hostel in south
London, which had imposed abstinence rules and regular testing.




    The reports

There was an extract from an OASys report about the Appellant dated 16
October 2019. It assessed him as being a medium risk of reoffending, due to
his immigration status and unemployment, and as a medium risk of serious
harm, because of tendencies to substance misuse, sexual pre-occupation and
violent sexual attacks. It specified the steps he needed to take to manage
his risks, which were that he had no contact with his victims; that
Hammersmith and Shepherds Bush were exclusion zones for him; that he
informed probation of any new relationship with a woman; that he complied
with immigration requirements; and that he engaged with drug and alcohol
services.

The National Probation Service letter from Nicole Voak stated that she and
a colleague had supervised the Appellant since May 2020. He had not
reoffended since his release from prison, and had attended all appointments
and complied with this the requirements of his order. He was assessed as
posing a medium risk to the public. His risk factors were lifestyle and
associates, accommodation and substance misuse. He had addressed these,
although it was not specified in what way he had done so. The letter stated
that there were "no concerns" about his risk level, and he did not pose an
imminent risk of harm to the public.

The psychiatric report is by Dr Michael Shortt, a Consultant Forensic
Psychiatrist. Mr Lindsay did not dispute his competence or credentials,
which are that he is a member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, has
done higher training in forensic psychiatry at Springfield University
Hospital and was an academic clinical fellow in forensic psychiatry at St
George's University. He has experience of writing medico-legal reports
going back to 2008. His report was based on an interview conducted on 15
May 2020 through an interpreter and via an online platform. He had seen the
letter of instruction, witness statements, the OASys assessment, and the
various documents concerning the Appellant's refugee status listed at 6.1.5-
10 of the report.

The report set out the Appellant's history, including being abused in
Sudan, claiming asylum in Great Britain and his criminal offences,
commenting "[The Appellant] has mentioned being oblivious to such offending
behaviours due to his consumption of alcohol and unintentional illicit
substance misuse." The report stated that the OASys report found the
Appellant was a low risk of reoffending and a medium risk to the public. He
remains in contact with family members, including his three siblings in
Sudan. He suggested to Dr Shortt that some of his relations on his mother's
side have autism, although there was no diagnosis by a GP or psychological
service. He had lived with his family in his village until 2003, when due
to the civil war they moved to a city, Madani. There was no history of
criminal offences, drug use or domestic violence in his family. He left
school at the age of 13 after being bullied, and later trained to be a
butcher.

The Appellant had a history of misusing cannabis and alcohol both in Sudan
and in Great Britain, but he said he had stopped using them while in
prison, and had focussed on his Islamic faith, although he had used
cannabis on his release from prison. While in prison his asthma had been
treated, but he had not received treatment for his drug and alcohol misuse.


When Dr Shortt asked the Appellant about his offences, he said "If I did
it, it's a shame because of my religion but I was out of my mind at the
time". He said he wished he could apologise to the women involved. He had
self-harmed by scratching his arm with a knife, and had suicidal thoughts.
During the interview he displayed considerable anxiety, and had a low mood.
He had memory problems.

Dr Shortt's risk assessment was that the Appellant's substance misuse was a
major factor in his offending. His risk of future offending would be
increased if he destabilised by not complying with his treatment for PTSD,
by his depression and substance misuse, though his faith reduced the
substance abuse risk.  He stated that the Appellant had expressed regret
for his offences. If his immigration status was normalised and he was able
to work and study, his future risk would reduce.

Dr Shortt's opinion was that the Appellant had a moderate depressive
episode and PTSD, but he was confident that he had capacity for legal
purposes. He had received no psychological or psychiatric input. The
National Institute for Clinical Excellence guidelines indicated that a
person with PTSD should have 8-12 weeks of trauma focussed psychotherapy,
and perhaps more than that. He should also be treated with Eye Movement
Desensitisation and Reprocessing, and with anti-depressant medication such
as Sertraline. If the Appellant was removed from the United Kingdom, his
condition might deteriorate and his risk of self-harm would rise.




    The parties' submissions

In Ms Childs' Skeleton Argument dated 17 November 2020, she formulated the
issues as being whether the Appellant had been convicted of a particularly
serious crime, and whether he constituted a threat to the security of the
United Kingdom. She correctly cited EN as authority for the propositions
that not every crime which receives a sentence of 2 years is particularly
serious, and that the Tribunal must consider mitigation.

As mitigation, she noted that the sentencing judge had not imposed an
extended sentence, and had not made a Sexual Harm Prevention Order. She
relied on the fact that the Appellant had been homeless at the time of the
offence, had suffered from mental health problems, and had been abused in
Sudan, including having been severely beaten by the security forces and
detained. He had expressed regret for his actions, which were committed
under the influence of alcohol and the drug Spice, and which were out of
character.  He had pleaded guilty to his offences, thereby avoiding the
need for his victims to testify, and had been a 25% discount on his
sentence.

If the Tribunal did find the crime was a particularly serious one, it
should then consider whether the Appellant was a danger to the community.
She cited the OASys report which assessed his risk of reoffending as low,
and that it was only his immigration status and unemployment which raised
his risk. He had tried to find work, but his immigration status had made
this more difficult. He had shown insight into the effect of his alcohol
and drug use. He has received a lot of support from the Probation Service
during his licence period. She also relied on the report of Dr Shortt.

In her oral submissions at the hearing, Ms Childs emphasised the
Appellant's circumstances when he committed the attacks - he was homeless,
he had suffered PTSD in his journey from Sudan, he had been recognised as a
refugee, and at the time he spoke little English. He had been badly advised
about accessing support, but now had a hostel place. She reiterated his
guilty plea, and that he understood the effect which drugs and alcohol can
have on him. He has been allowed to live in mixed-sex accommodation, which
suggests there are no concerns about his sexual risk.

For the Secretary of State, Mr Lindsay relied on the decision letter. He
said that the Appellant had made two separate attacks on lone women, which
were serious and involved a considerable amount of force. The fact that the
Appellant suffered from PTSD and other mental health problems did not
reduce the seriousness of the attacks. He noted that Dr Shortt did not
engage with some aspects of the OASys report, in particular the comment
that the Appellant had a "sexual preoccupation".

Mr Lindsay commented that the Appellant's evidence was vague and evasive
and did not fully accept his personal responsibility, for example when he
said, "If I did it, it's a shame". His evidence did not properly reflect
the seriousness of his offences - for example, his comment that
"Unfortunately, I can't even rape someone." The Appellant's claim that he
did not even think about sex was clearly wrong, given the reference in the
OASys report to his "sexual preoccupation". It suggested that he was in
denial about the seriousness of his offending. This aspect of the OASys
report had not been considered by Dr Shortt, which undermined the cogency
of his conclusions. Dr Shortt's observation at 17.9 of his report, that if
the Appellant had a job, it would give a structure to his life which would
reduce the risk of boredom and poor finance that could cause him to drink
alcohol or take drugs, suggested these were triggers which could cause him
to reoffend. He invited the Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.



The Tribunal's Findings

When the Appellant was sentenced, HHJ Curtis-Raleigh said the attacks were
"terrifying", and that they were of a type which caused real fear and made
women feel restricted in what they could do. We agree. The Appellant
grabbed his first victim from behind in the dark, pulled her to the ground,
got on top of her and tried to kiss her. His method of attacking his second
victim was similar. The victim impact statements make it clear that both
victims were very profoundly affected by the attacks in many aspects of
their lives and for a long time. The Appellant claimed in his witness
statement that he is sexually impotent, although Dr Shortt did not confirm
this through physical examination. Even if the Appellant is impotent, it
does not reduce the seriousness of his attacks, nor does the fact that his
victims were able to fight him off. HHJ Curtis-Raleigh rightly felt that
the Court needed to protect people from the actions of men like the
Appellant.

Dealing with the mitigation advanced, it is true that the judge did not
impose an extended sentence. However, he did impose a total sentence of 4
years. This is a substantial sentence, and consistent with the offence
being very serious. It is also true that no application was made for a
Sexual Harm Prevention Order. However, SHPOs are typically imposed to
restrict a convicted sex offender from engaging in particular jobs, for
example working with children, or certain activities, such as types of
internet use. R v Smith and Others [2011] EWCA Crim 1772 makes clear the
need for the terms of a SHPO to be tailored to the exact requirements of
the case. Given that the offences were violent attacks committed at random,
it is unclear what kind of restriction would be effective and could be
tailored to the circumstances of the offence, particularly in light of the
requirement that an SHPO should be capable of being enforced and policed.

The Appellant was homeless and suffering from mental health problems when
he committed the offences, and he pleaded guilty and expressed regret. All
of these matters are mitigating factors. However, in our judgment they do
not outweigh the terrifying nature of the attacks and their effect on the
victims. We conclude that the Appellant has failed to rebut the presumption
that the offences for which he has been convicted were particularly serious
within the meaning of section 72.

The burden is on the Appellant to persuade us that, in the formulation of
the Court in EN, there is no danger of his offence being repeated and so he
does not constitute a danger to the community. Ms Childs relied on the
report of Dr Shortt and the comment in the OASys report that his risk of
offending was low, as well as the wider mitigating circumstances around his
offences.

The Tribunal recognises that these matters provide some support for the
view that the Appellant is a low risk of reoffending. However, the Tribunal
was troubled by the reference in the OASys report to his "sexual
preoccupation." That report referred to his risk of reoffending as low in
the context of statistics about reoffending rates, rather than his specific
presentation and circumstances. The risk assessment specific to the
Appellant was a medium risk of reoffending, because of his immigration
status and unemployment. The inference was that if his immigration and
employment situations were improved, his risk would reduce. He presented a
medium risk of serious harm because of his substance misuse, sexual
preoccupation and violent sexual attacks.

The Tribunal was very concerned by these last comments. The view expressed
that he had a sexual preoccupation is based on many interactions with the
Appellant as part of the offender management process, and we attach
considerable weight to it. Dr Shortt did not engage with the concern that
the Appellant had a sexual preoccupation, and there was nothing in the
evidence to suggest that this had been properly addressed.

The Appellant made two remarks in his evidence which indicated a deeply
worrying  attitude to sexual issues - when asked about his attitude towards
his sexual impotence and towards women, he said that "Is there a lion who
can attack his prey without claws?" This was a bizarre and troubling
observation, and not one which suggested he had achieved any insight into
his sexual preoccupation and history of sexual violence. When asked whether
his attacks were not serious because he had not penetrated the women, his
comment was "Unfortunately, I cannot even rape someone". This also troubled
the Tribunal. The regret which he said he felt was expressed conditionally
- to the effect that, if I did it, then I am sorry. This indicated that the
regret was partial or qualified. We concluded that he lacked real insight
into his offending.

His offending behaviour was impulsive. The Appellant's evidence was that he
had embraced his Islamic faith and that he would not abuse alcohol or other
substances in future. However, he had not done therapeutic or other work to
address his substance issues. There was no sufficiently cogent reason to
think that if the Appellant was in future placed in a stressful situation
similar to when he committed his offence that he would have the resources
to prevent himself acting impulsively.

In these circumstances, the Tribunal concluded that the Appellant poses a
considerable threat to the community, in particular to women. The evidence
he had produced did not rebut that threat for the purposes of section 72
NIAA 2002.

Accordingly, and in light of the sole ground of appeal available to the
Appellant under section 84(3) of the 2002 Act, his appeal is dismissed and
the decision of the Secretary of State is confirmed.

We restate here our agreement with the Respondent's concession that the
Appellant remains a refugee within the meaning of Article 1(2A) of the
Refugee Convention.




Notice of Decision

The appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to  revoke  the  Appellant's
refugee status is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made.





Signed      J Jolliffe Date: 15 January 2021



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Jolliffe


APPENDIX 1: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00086/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2020                          |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    M A M
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of Sudan and  is  a  member  of  the  Berti
    ethnic group. As a result of this, he was recognised as a refugee on 11
    November 2015 and granted limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    until 10 November 2020.

 2. The appellant now appeals with permission against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A J M Baldwin  ("the  judge"),  promulgated  on  11
    November 2019, in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the
    respondent's decision, dated 6 August 2019,  revoking  the  appellant's
    refugee status, pursuant  to  paragraphs  338A  and  339AC(ii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules"). These provide that a person's grant of
    refugee status can be revoked where:

           "having been convicted by a final  judgment  of  a  particularly
           serious crime, the person constitutes a danger to the  community
           of the United Kingdom."

 3. On 27 September 2017, the appellant was  convicted  on  two  counts  of
    sexual assault and sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment for each  offence
    (committed  against  two  separate  women),  each   sentence   to   run
    consecutively. In addition, he was made  subject  to  the  notification
    provisions of the Sexual Offenders Act 2003 for an  indefinite  period.
    In light of this, the respondent  made  the  decision  leading  to  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. The core legislative element of that
    decision was the issuing of a  certificate  under  section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  as  amended  ("the  2002
    Act"). Insofar as is relevant, section 72 of  the  2002  Act  reads  as
    follows:

           "72 Serious criminal

           (1) This section applies for the purpose of the construction and
           application  of  Article  33(2)  of   the   Refugee   Convention
           (exclusion from protection).

           (2) A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a final
           judgment of a particularly serious crime  and  to  constitute  a
           danger to the community of the United Kingdom if he is-

           (a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

           (b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years.

           ...

           (6) A presumption under subsection (2), (3) or (4) that a person
           constitutes a danger to the  community  is  rebuttable  by  that
           person.

           ...

           (9) Subsection (10) applies where-

           (a) a person appeals under section  82  of  this  Act  or  under
           section 2 of the Special Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997
           (c. 68) wholly or partly on  the  ground  mentioned  in  section
           84(1)(a) or (3)(a) of this Act (breach of the  United  Kingdom's
           obligations under the Refugee Convention), and

           (b)  the  Secretary  of  State   issues   a   certificate   that
           presumptions under subsection (2),  (3)  or  (4)  apply  to  the
           person (subject to rebuttal).

           (10) The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal-

           (a)  must  begin  substantive  deliberation  on  the  appeal  by
           considering the certificate, and  Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002 Page 56

           (b) if in agreement that presumptions under subsection (2),  (3)
           or (4) apply (having given  the  appellant  an  opportunity  for
           rebuttal) must dismiss the appeal in so far as it relies on  the
           ground specified in subsection (9)(a)."

 4. Notwithstanding the decision to revoke the appellant's refugee  status,
    the respondent has accepted throughout the appellate  proceedings  that
    he cannot be removed from the United Kingdom to Sudan by virtue of  the
    absolute protection afforded to him by Article 3 ECHR.

 5. It is to be  noted  that  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was under section 82(1)(c) of  the  2002  Act,  and  his  sole
    ground of appeal was that contained  in  section  84(3)  of  that  Act,
    namely whether the revocation decision breached  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under the  Refugee  Convention  and/or  in  relation  to  a
    person's eligibility for a grant of humanitarian protection.



The judge's decision

 6. The judge begins his decision with the consideration of an  adjournment
    application made on behalf of the appellant. In  the  lead  up  to  the
    hearing, the First-tier Tribunal had issued directions to both parties,
    requiring them to use their best endeavours to obtain  and  produce  an
    OASys report. In the event, the respondent failed to  provide  a  copy,
    whilst the appellant's solicitors complied with the direction, although
    only two pages of the 47-page report were available to them. These were
    included in the appellant's bundle.

 7. In support of the adjournment application, it  was  asserted  that  the
    OASys report had only been written 2 weeks prior  to  the  hearing.  An
    expert report was to be sought from a psychologist or  psychiatrist  in
    order to respond to the OASys report and address what were believed  to
    be certain mental health and  other  related  issues.  There  had  been
    insufficient time for such a report to be commissioned.

 8. The judge refused the application on the basis that the  appellant  and
    his solicitors had had ample opportunity to  adduce  whatever  evidence
    they wished to rely on. The  judge  relied  on  the  overall  timeframe
    relating  to  the  respondent's  decision-making   process,   and   the
    appellant's release from immigration detention approximately  2  months
    before the hearing. In addition, he took the view that issues raised in
    the extracts of the OASys report only related to  "extraneous  factors"
    such as the appellant's immigration status and unemployment, neither of
    which was said to have any real bearing on the issues in the appeal.

 9. Based in large part upon the sentencing remarks of  HHJ  Curtis-Raleigh
    (which clearly articulated the  circumstances  of  the  offences),  the
    judge concluded that the appellant had been convicted  of  "undoubtedly
    particularly serious crimes"; thus, the first presumption contained  in
    section 72(2) of the 2002 Act has not been rebutted (see [22]). At [23]-
    [24], the judge went on to conclude that  the  appellant  was  also  "a
    danger to the community"; the second presumption had not been  rebutted
    either. In light of these conclusions, the judge was bound  to  dismiss
    the appeal, in line with section 72(10)(b) of the 2002 Act.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. The grounds of appeal are threefold: first, it is said that  the  judge
    acted unfairly in refusing the  adjournment  application,  particularly
    given the very short timeframe between  the  production  of  the  OASys
    report and the hearing; second, the judge erred  by  placing  too  much
    reliance on the sentencing remarks and had not taken account of certain
    other factors; third, the judge took irrelevant  factors  into  account
    when concluding that the appellant was a danger to the community.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne
    on 20 December 2019.



The hearing

12. Ms Childs relied on the grounds and focused on the  adjournment  issue.
    She submitted that it was in effect impossible for the  appellant  (who
    is legally aided) to have commissioned a relevant expert report in time
    for the hearing before the judge. A report could have addressed  issues
    relevant to both limbs of section 72(2) of the 2002 Act. In respect  of
    the "particularly serious crime" issue, Ms Childs relied  on  paras  66
    and 69 of the leading authority on section 72, EN (Serbia) [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 630; [2010] 3 WLR 182, which indicated, in her submission, that the
    seriousness of offences must be assessed in  view  of  the  surrounding
    circumstances as a  whole.  The  applicant's  mental  state  and  other
    connected factors could be relevant to that assessment. In  respect  of
    the "danger to the community" issue, it was  submitted  that  a  report
    could have dealt with the OASys report, rehabilitation, and future risk
    in general.

13. Mr Jarvis essentially made two points in response.  First,  that  there
    was no error in respect of the refusal of the adjournment  application.
    Second, if there was, an expert report might conceivably be relevant to
    the issue of the "danger to the community" issue,  but  would  be  very
    unlikely to materially address past events, namely whether  the  crimes
    for which the appellant had been convicted were "particularly  serious"
    in nature. Therefore, any error by the judge was immaterial.

14. We express our gratitude to both  representatives  for  the  clear  and
    concise manner in which they put their respective cases forward.



Decision on error of law

15. We conclude that the judge did err in law by refusing  the  application
    for an adjournment. We conclude that this error is material because  we
    are satisfied that the expert report sought by the Appellant could have
    properly addressed both limbs of section 72(2) of  the  2002  Act,  and
    that the evidence could have made a difference to the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

16. The overarching requirement when considering  the  application  for  an
    adjournment is that of fairness  (see,  for  example  SH  (Afghanistan)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1284). The appellant had been aware of the respondent's
    intention to revoke his refugee status since 22 May 2019,  and  of  the
    appeal decision since its service on 6 August 2019. It  is  also  right
    that he had been released from  immigration  detention  some  2  months
    before the hearing. However, in our judgment it is  the  production  of
    the OASys report that is of most significance. That report  categorised
    his risk of reoffending as "medium"  and  it  also  identified  certain
    "vulnerabilities" such as  his  immigration  status  and  unemployment,
    although we note that substance misuse is also  cited.  The  report  at
    least arguably raised matters which could properly be the subject of an
    expert report from a suitably qualified professional.  The  very  short
    timeframe of just 2 weeks between the production of  the  OASys  report
    and the hearing, whilst alluded to briefly by  the  judge,  effectively
    precluded the appellant from being able to commission a report  of  his
    own. Not least amongst the obstacles in his path would  have  been  the
    process of obtaining  funding  from  the  Legal  Aid  Agency,  a  point
    confirmed by Ms Childs and in respect of which we  have  no  reason  to
    doubt.

17. The fact that the truncated  copy  of  the  OASys  report  was  in  the
    appellant's possession prior to the  hearing  does  not  undermine  the
    appellant's case. He (through his solicitors) had sought to comply with
    the directions issued by the First-tier Tribunal as best  he  could  in
    the circumstances.

18. On the facts of this case, we are satisfied that the judge  acted  with
    procedural unfairness by refusing the application for an adjournment.

19. Our reasons for concluding that the error is material are as follows.

20. Para 66 of EN (Serbia) states:

           "66. I see no reason why a rebuttable presumption,  imposed  for
           the purposes of a decision as to whether  removal  would  be  in
           breach of Article 33(1), should  be  incompatible  with  Article
           33(2) of the Convention, at least  in  cases  in  which  it  may
           reasonably be  inferred  that  a  conviction  gives  rise  to  a
           reasonable  likelihood  that  a  person's  conviction  is  of  a
           particularly serious crime and that he constitutes a  danger  to
           the community. The Convention does not prescribe  the  procedure
           by which the conditions required by  Article  33(2)  are  to  be
           established; and the creation of a rebuttable presumption  is  a
           matter of procedure rather than of substance. I accept that  the
           Convention places an onus on the State of refuge. Under  section
           72, it is for the Secretary  of  State  to  establish  that  the
           person in question has been convicted of a relevant offence.  In
           practice, once the State has established that a person has  been
           convicted of what is on the face of it  a  particularly  serious
           crime, it will be for him to show either that it was not in fact
           particularly serious, because of mitigating  factors  associated
           with its commission, or that because there is no danger  of  its
           repetition he does not constitute a danger to the community."

21. The final sentence of this passage indicates that in seeking  to  rebut
    the "particularly serious crime" presumption under section 72(2) of the
    2002 Act, an individual is entitled to put forward "mitigating  factors
    associated with its [the  crime]  commission".  In  keeping  with  this
    authoritative guidance was the  view  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal in IH (s.72;  'Particularly  Serious  Crime')  Eritrea  [2009]
    UKAIT 00012, where at para 74, the following was said:

           "thus, the forensic  investigation  of  whether  a  crime  is  a
           "particularly serious" one in a given case must be a struggle by
           the decision-maker (judicial or otherwise) with  the  facts  and
           circumstances relating to the conviction and the offender."

22. We note that the Court of Appeal was appraised of the  decision  in  IH
    and said nothing to indicate a disapproval of the passage quoted  above
    (see para 88 of EN (Serbia)).

23. The guidance shows us that the assessment of  whether  the  appellant's
    crimes  were  "particularly  serious"  involved  consideration  of  all
    relevant factors relating to their commission. There is  no  reason  to
    suggest that the appellant's mental health and  other  aspects  of  his
    circumstances at  the  time  could  not  have  had  a  bearing  on  the
    assessment. In  turn,  an  expert  report  from  a  suitably  qualified
    professional could provide evidence as to the appellant's circumstances
    at the time of the offences which could (and we need put it  no  higher
    than that) have affected the judge's conclusion on the first rebuttable
    presumption.

24. Para 66 of EN (Serbia) also indicates that specific evidence  going  to
    the existence of "mitigating factors" is capable of having an impact on
    the assessment of whether an individual represents  a  "danger  to  the
    community". This was recognised (in our  view,  quite  rightly)  by  Mr
    Jarvis. Indeed, the potential importance of adducing expert evidence on
    the second rebuttable presumption represents a clearer  basis  for  the
    materiality of the judge's procedural error  than  in  respect  of  the
    first. Again, we  are  satisfied  that  a  report  on  the  appellant's
    circumstances as they were at the date of the hearing before the  judge
    could have affected the conclusion on the  "danger  to  the  community"
    issue.

25. Whilst we do have some misgivings about one or two of the factors taken
    into account by the judge when assessing the "danger to the  community"
    issue, it is unnecessary to reach conclusions on these. The materiality
    of the procedural error is sufficient for us to set aside  the  judge's
    decision, and this we do.



Disposal

26. Having regard to para 7.2 of  the  Practice  Statement  and  all  other
    relevant circumstances, we conclude that this appeal should be retained
    in the Upper Tribunal. None of the judge's findings shall be preserved.
    Relevant fact-finding can be undertaken in due course. It is clear from
    our error of law decision that a remaking decision  cannot  take  place
    until the expert report sought by the appellant has been produced.

27. The scope of the remaking decision shall be limited to the question  of
    whether the respondent's decision to  revoke  the  appellant's  refugee
    status is contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
    Refugee  Convention.  It  has  not  been  asserted  that   humanitarian
    protection is relied on. Neither Article 3 nor Article 8  ECHR  are  in
    play.



Anonymity


28. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and we maintain
    that on the basis that the appellant remains a person in need of
    international protection, whether or not he is excluded from the
    protection of the Refugee Convention.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

This appeal is adjourned for a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.



Directions to the parties

   1. Any further evidence relied on by the appellant  shall  be  filed  and
      served no later than 14 days before the resumed hearing;

   2. Oral evidence from the appellant shall be permitted, but  only  if  an
      updated witness statement is provided in accordance with direction 1;
   3. Both parties shall file and serve skeleton  arguments  no  later  than
      five days before the resumed hearing.



Signed      [pic]            Date: 20 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

