
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
RP/00164/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2019                        | On 19 March 2019                     |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE LANG DBE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     YD
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Fitzsimons, Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                    Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  His date of birth is 12
January 1983.


2.   The Appellant's immigration history is lengthy. We need only summarise
it for the purposes of this decision.  He entered the UK in 1994. On 19
November 2003 he was granted asylum, his appeal having been allowed on
asylum grounds by the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT).  In 2013 the Appellant
was convicted of robbery and sentenced to four years imprisonment. As a
consequence of his criminality the Secretary of State made a deportation
order on 17 November 2016.  On 22 November 2016 the Secretary of State made
a decision to cease the Appellant's refugee status, exclude him from
protection (pursuant to Section 72 of the 2002 Act), and to refuse his
human rights claim under Articles 8 and 3.  The Appellant appealed.  His
appeal was dismissed by FTT Judge P S Aujla following a hearing on 11
December 2018 in a decision that was promulgated on 19 December 2018.The
Appellant has been granted permission to appeal on all grounds.

3.   The Appellant's criminal history, very much distilled, is that between
1999 and March 2009 he accumulated ten convictions for sixteen offences
including robbery and supply of class A drugs.  On 23 November 2009 he was
convicted of robbery and sentenced to fourteen months imprisonment.  On 19
December 2013 he was convicted of robbery and sentenced to four years in
custody.  On 30 September 2015 he was convicted of two counts concerning
having been found unlawfully with a mobile phone whilst in detention.  We
understand that there are two further offences which have been committed by
the Appellant since he was released from custody, involving relatively
minor drug offences.

The decision of the FTT

4.   The judge found that the Appellant was unable to rebut the presumption
that he was a danger to the community and he said that in the circumstances
"I therefore uphold the Respondent's decision on cessation of his refugee
status and do not consider any fresh claim to asylum in light of that" (see
[33]).   The judge went on to dismiss the appeal on Article 3 and Article 8
grounds.

The error of law

5.   There are very lengthy grounds of appeal, which, confusingly, have
been redrafted three times using different numbering.  The third version is
contained in the Appellant's skeleton argument prepared for the hearing
before us and this was the version that we and the parties worked from at
the hearing.  Mr Wilding indicated that it was conceded by the Secretary of
State that ground 4 and ground 7 were made out and this amounts to a
material error. It was accepted that at paragraphs 14 and 33 of the
decision the judge conflated cessation with exclusion and the test applied
for cessation was not in accordance with the judgment in MA (Somalia)
[2018] EWCA Civ 994. He accepted that the approach by the judge to the
issue of cessation was erroneous.  If the Appellant is indeed a refugee,
this informs the rest of the case and therefore the error is material.
Cessation is a separate question from whether the Appellant is excluded
because of his criminality.  Mr Wilding said that there was a structural
error in the decision of the judge. He conceded that the judge materially
erred when assessing Article 8 because the assessment was inadequate (see
[42]).

6.   Mr Wilding further conceded that in the light of the material errors
identified none of the findings of the FTT are sustainable.  In these
circumstances, both parties agreed that the decision should be set aside in
its entirety.  Mr Wilding indicated that, in his view, the Appellant had
not had a proper determination of his appeal and he and Miss Fitzsimons
agreed that the matter should be remitted to the FTT for a fresh hearing.

7.   We set aside the decision of the FTT to dismiss the Appellant's appeal
and remit the matter to the FTT for a fresh hearing on all matters.  We do
not preserve any of the judge's findings.

8.   We strongly suggest that the FTT consider making directions that
include the Appellant confirming and clarifying the grounds of appeal
relied upon in the light of the statutory regime with reference to Sections
82, 84 and 86 of the 2002 Act. We observe that the only allowable ground
under s84(3) is by reference to the Refugee Convention.  We suggest that
the FTT direct the parties to endeavour to agree the correct structural
approach that should be adopted by the FTT with reference to relevant case
law including MA and Essa (revocation of protection status appeals) [2018]
UKUT 244.




Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 14 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

