
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00041/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 October 2019                            |On 27 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     e k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr James Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  respondent
(also "the claimant). Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of
court. I make this order  because  the  respondent  is  a  refugee  and  so
entitled to anonymity.

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the
claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of State on 14 March  2017
to revoke her refugee status.

3. The Secretary of State's decision relied on paragraph 339A of HC 395  and
particularly paragraph 339A(v) which sets out circumstances  in  which  the
Refugee Convention ceases to apply and includes  the  situation  where  the
person who has been recognised as a refugee:

    "Can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with which they
    have been recognised as a refugee have ceased  to  exist,  continue  to
    refuse to  avail  themselves  of  the  protection  of  the  country  of
    nationality".

4. It is apparent from a simple plain reading that this Rule  applies  to  a
person who has been recognised  as  a  refugee  but  who  no  longer  needs
protection because of a change of circumstance.  In that event, subject  to
other qualifications, according to the Rules a person's status as a refugee
can be taken away.  It is different from the case of a person excluded from
protection of the Refugee Convention whose  circumstances  are  subject  to
paragraph 339AA.  Paragraph 338A provides for  the  revocation  of  refugee
status in certain circumstances including that  the  Convention  ceases  to
apply because of a change of circumstance of the kind indicated above.

5. According to the Secretary of State, such a  change  has  happened  here.
The claimant's refugee status has been revoked.  She appealed to the First-
tier Tribunal and the appeal was successful.

6. As is usual practice, and it is probably a requirement, the Secretary  of
State notified UNHCR of her  intention  to  cease  the  claimant's  refugee
status.  The letter from UNCHR dated 13 February 2017 drew attention  to  a
distinction between "cancelling"  a  decision  to  grant  somebody  refugee
status and a decision to revoke refugee status.  The letter said (N2 in the
bundle) that:

    "Information which casts doubt on the grounds on  which  a  person  was
    recognised as a refugee relates  to  cancellation  of  refugee  status.
    This, therefore, relates to those aspects of the HO letter  which  call
    into question the  credibility  of  [the  claimant's]  original  claim.
    Although cancellation  is  not  expressly  provided  for  in  the  1951
    Convention,  Paragraph  117  of  UNHCR's  Handbook  on  Procedures  and
    Criteria for Determining Refugee Status refers to "circumstances  which
    have come to light that indicate that a person should never  have  been
    recognised as a refugee  in  the  first  place".   It  is  of  critical
    importance that the HO clearly indicates that  correct  legal  grounds,
    which it is seeking to apply in this case, so as to  ensure  that  [the
    claimant] and her legal representatives are  sufficiently  informed  to
    address the concerns raised."

7. No doubt this was said because it is plain from reading the Secretary  of
State's NOTIFICATION  OF  INTENTION  TO  REVOKE  REFUGEE  STATUS  that  the
Secretary of State is not satisfied  that  the  claimant  gave  a  truthful
account to support her claim to be a refugee  and,  given  the  information
presently available, thinks  that  the  claimant  should  never  have  been
recognised as a refugee.  This is not to say that the decision was wrong on
the evidence available at  the  time.   Evidence  has  emerged  since  that
decision was made which, according to the  Secretary  of  State,  makes  it
clear that the claimant is not a refugee.

8. At the risk of over summarising in the  cause  of  clarity  the  claimant
said that she was estranged from her husband, that during the demise of  an
unhappy marriage she had a liaison with someone who was  not  her  husband,
that she became pregnant and although she was unsure of  the  paternity  of
the child it at least could have been the child of her  lover  rather  than
her husband. In the premises, she had brought disgrace to her family.   She
was trafficked to the United  Kingdom  because  she  had  been  seduced  by
someone known as "Joani" and that she was a victim of  trafficking  and  at
risk of re-trafficking and also at risk of ostracization because of  things
that had happened in Albania.

9. The Secretary of State now has evidence that the child,  whose  paternity
was doubted, is the genetic child of the claimant's husband and that  at  a
time when, according to the claimant, she was being brought to  the  United
Kingdom by "Joani"  she  was  in  fact  in  Greece  in  which  country  the
claimant's husband then resided.

10. It is quite clear that the Secretary of State does not accept  that  the
claimant is now, or ever was, in need  of  international  protection.   For
example, at page 8 of the refusal letter of 14 March 2017 the Secretary  of
State says:

    "With regards to your particular case I am not satisfied that you are a
    genuine victim of trafficking given the  inconsistencies  I  have  come
    across whilst investigating whether revocation was appropriate  and  as
    such do not believe you would be at risk of  re-trafficking  in  future
    should you be returned to Albania."

11. Nevertheless,  the  decision  was  to  revoke  refugee  status  and  the
revocation of refugee status under Article 1C(5) of the 1951 Convention  is
paralleled in paragraph 339A(v) of  HC  395  which  applies,  as  indicated
above, when a person no longer needs protection "because the  circumstances
in connection with which they have been recognised as a refugee have ceased
to exist, continue to refuse to avail themselves of the protection  of  the
country of nationality". It may be that the Secretary of State  could  have
revoked the claimant's status lawfully under paragraph  339AB  but  is  not
what happened here.

12. The First-tier Tribunal  directed  its  attention  very  firmly  to  the
requirements of the Rules and  was  only  concerned  about  evidence  of  a
relevant change in the "circumstances in connection  with  which  they  had
been recognised as a refugee".

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge would not  entertain  evidence  about  the
claimant's alleged sojourn in Greece.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
alert to the possibility that the  claimant's  circumstances  had  changed.
Here, as is reflected in the decision letter, the relevant change was  that
she had been reunited with her husband and the parentage of the  child  was
confirmed.

14. It is absolutely impossible  not  to  be  sceptical  about  the  alleged
reconciliation.  The possibility that the claimant's unhappiness  with  her
husband was feigned or exaggerated with the intention of reconciliation  as
soon as was possible after refugee status had been obtained improperly must
present itself to any decision  maker  who  looks  to  the  facts  but  the
Secretary of State, although clearly disbelieving the  appellant,  did  not
cancel refugee status but revoked it for one reason only and that  was  the
change in circumstance "in connection with which they had  been  recognised
as a refugee have  ceased  to  exist".   Reference  to  circumstances  that
"ceased to exist" clearly means that the circumstances have  existed.   The
decision does not show much consideration of how or what circumstances  had
ceased to exist.  If there is a protracted and strained argument to be made
suggesting, for example, that the changed circumstances that has  cease  to
exist is the belief  that  the  claimant  had  been  trafficked  then  this
argument was not made out.

15. I find that the judge in the First-tier Tribunal  cannot  be  criticised
for refusing to engage with evidence  undermining  the  original  decision.
The judge rightly dealt with the case in the way the Secretary of State had
decided to put it, namely that the claimant is a person who was  a  refugee
(not a person recognised wrongly as a refugee) but  who  no  longer  needed
protection.

16. The decision leading to the appellant being recognised as a refugee  was
a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Finch  (as  she  then  was)  and
although it  is  summarised  fairly  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
decision that I have to consider the reasons given are even fuller than the
summary suggests.  Of particular relevance is paragraph 31 of Judge Finch's
decision where she said:

    "Having considered the totality of the evidence and having applied  the
    requisite low  standard  of  proof  I  find  that  the  [claimant]  was
    trafficked from Albania and that  she  would  be  at  serious  risk  of
    persecution in the  form  of  retribution,  re-trafficking  and  social
    rejection if removed to Albania.  I also find that  she  would  not  be
    provided with sufficient protection  by  the  Albanian  government  and
    would not be able to live safely anywhere in Albania."

17. Judge Finch  also  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  sold  into
prostitution and had escaped and that her handlers had a clear  motive  for
seeking her out and punishing her or re-trafficking her.

18. In his summary of Judge  Finch's  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Shaw found that the reasons  given  by  Judge  Finch  for  recognising  the
claimant as  a  refugee  included  her  having  entered  into  an  arranged
marriage, her having been ill-treated  by  her  husband  and  in-laws,  her
having started  a  relationship  with  Joani,  that  the  relationship  was
discovered and she was rejected by her in-laws and her  father  because  of
the shame brought on the family, that Joani persuaded her to leave  Albania
and  go  to  the  United  Kingdom  where  she  was  raped  and  sold   into
prostitution, that she  escaped,  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
appellant's husband or family would take her back and that she was at  risk
of re-trafficking.  The only thing that has changed in  that  list  is  the
evidence of her husband taking her back.  There was  evidence  her  husband
would take her back now.  There was no evidence that the families would not
continue to bear a grudge and indeed there was every reason to believe that
they would.  Neither was there any reason to doubt the finding that she had
had a relationship with Joani who presumably would be  a  sworn  enemy  and
would seek vengeance.  The shame  brought  on  the  family  remained.   Her
history of being raped and sold into prostitution remained.

19. I have to ask myself if it was  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that
having a supportive husband was not sufficient reason to conclude that  she
was no longer at risk.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 63  took
a poor view of the respondent "seeking to relitigate the 2013 appeal by the
back door".  The judge  then  found,  having  considered  country  guidance
cases, that the claimant had shown on the balance of probabilities that she
would be at risk of re-trafficking if returned to Albania.  The judge  said
this was because she meets a number of risk factors set out in the decision
in TD and AD (Trafficked women) (CG) [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) v SSHD.

20. It would have been more helpful if the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
identified expressly the risk factors that the claimant met.  It  is  clear
that First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore accepted expressly that the  appellant
had had an extramarital affair (paragraph 62) and TD and AD  (at  paragraph
3(c)) recognised that there is a strict code of  honour  which  meant  that
trafficked women could have difficulty reintegrating.  The case  recognised
that those with children outside marriage are particularly vulnerable.  The
clear implication is that a person without  a  child  outside  marriage  is
still vulnerable.  Clearly having a husband would assist the claimant but I
am not persuaded that it was perverse or otherwise unlawful for the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge to conclude that a woman who had  been  trafficked  and
who had been rejected by her community did  not  face  the  risk  of  being
trafficked again.  I do not say that this is the only decision  permissible
on the evidence but it is a lawful decision.

21. I have reached these conclusions  having  considered  all  the  material
before me including Mr Melvin's submissions and the  grounds  and  skeleton
argument.

22. Nevertheless, I find it appropriate to make some specific comment on  Mr
Melvin's skeleton argument. It did not  limit  itself  to  the  grounds  of
appeal.

23. The appeal in the First-tier Tribunal  was  due  to  be  heard  with  an
appeal by the appellant's husband against removal.  The Secretary of  State
clearly anticipated being able to cross-examine the appellant and also  her
husband.  Her husband withdrew his appeal and so fell from the picture  and
the appellant chose not  to  give  evidence.   This  is  a  case  in  which
Secretary of State bears the burden of proof.  The claimant does  not  have
to help.  The decision to withdraw the husband's appeal is not an error  of
law by the First-tier Tribunal and,  except  in  so  far  as  the  claimant
adopted it, I do not see how much  weight  could  have  given  properly  to
evidence in her husband's.  He was not a party to the proceedings  and  did
not attend.

24. If the Secretary of State had wanted to say that the claimant  would  be
supported by her husband and her husband's family she could  have  said  as
much in the decision but she did not to do that.   The First-tier  Tribunal
did not err in not considering the claimant's husband's case. It  had  been
withdrawn. The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to have regard  to  all  of
the material before it but evidence in the claimant's  husband's  case  was
unlikely to be of more than peripheral relevance and Mr Melvin was not able
to show that it was important in the claimant's appeal.

25. As I indicated I agree with the  criticism  in  the  grounds  that  more
could have been said about how the claimant came within the scope of TD and
AD but, in my judgment, sufficient has been said for  the  decision  to  be
lawful.

26. The difficulty for the Secretary of State in this case is that  she  has
not had the courage to make  the  decision  that  she  clearly  thinks  was
justified by the evidence.  As far as I am aware there is no  provision  in
the Immigration Rules for cancelling a grant of refugee status.  The  UNCHR
clearly contemplated such a course and indeed refer expressly to a part  of
the Convention that provides for it.  Maybe this is something the Secretary
of  State  needs  to  consider.  Revocation  because  status  was  obtained
dishonestly is, sometimes, permissible under rule 339AB but  that  was  not
relied upon here.

27. Be that as it may, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  correctly,  directed
his mind to whether the claimant was still a refugee in the  light  of  the
fact that she was reconciled to her husband.  Given  her  history  and  the
background material he concluded that she is still a  refugee.   It  was  a
permissible decision.  It seems to me undesirable  that  the  Secretary  of
State should want to deal with a case on cessation grounds  when  in  truth
the reasons for the decision are that  the  claimant  is  thought  to  have
deceived the First-tier Tribunal and  fresh  evidence  indicates  that  she
should never have been recognised as a refugee.  Perhaps if that route  had
been followed the result would have different here.

Notice of Decision

28. For all these reasons I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 November 2019               |



