
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00095/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2019                  |On 6 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                     EN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                        Appellant/Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Respondent/Appellant


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For EN:  Mr P Haywood, instructed through direct access
For the Secretary of State:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

This case involves appeals to the Upper Tribunal by both parties.  As such,
it is convenient to refer to them as 'EN' and the 'Secretary of State'.

EN appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 28 June
2017 to revoke his refugee status, on the basis of cessation; and to refuse
his human rights claim, in the context of the Secretary of State having
issued a notice of intention to issue a deportation order.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Buckwell ("the FtT") promulgated a decision on 14 August
2019 in which he dismissed the EN's appeal insofar as it related to EN's
refugee status, concluding that EN fell within the scope of section 72 of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as a result of a previous
sentence of three years' imprisonment for possession with intent to supply
class-A drugs.  The FtT did not go on to consider further the issue of
cessation of EN's Refugee Convention status.

In respect of EN's appeal on human rights grounds, the FtT allowed the
appeal both in respect of his private life by reference to paragraph 399A
of the Immigration Rules and section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act; and in
respect of his family life, by reference to paragraphs 399(a) and (b) of
the Immigration Rules and section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act, by virtue of his
relationship with a British partner, with whom he now had a son.

The Secretary of State appealed the FtT's decision, but only in respect of
the human rights claim relating to EN's family life; and did not appeal the
FtT's decision about EN's private life.    At the hearing before us, Mr
Clarke expressly conceded that in the light of the lack of any appeal
against the FtT's decision about the applicant's private life, the FtT's
decision on the human rights appeal relating to EN's family life did not
disclose any material error of law, and he conceded that the Secretary of
State's appeal should therefore be dismissed.

Decision on Secretary of State's appeal

Considering the concessions made on behalf of the Secretary of State, we
dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal against the FtT's decision.

EN's appeal

Whilst Mr Clarke did not make any similar concession in relation to the
FtT's decision in relation to certification under section 72 of the 2002
Act, he accepted that the FtT had not explained, at [179] of the decision,
why the FtT concluded that EN had not rebutted the presumption that EN
constituted a danger to the community of the UK, in circumstances where EN
had provided evidence on that very point, i.e. in relation to his
rehabilitation.  The FtT had simply referred to the fact of EN receiving a
three-year prison sentence.  The FtT had also made no findings in relation
to cessation of EN's Refugee Convention status: see Essa (Revocation of
protection status appeals) [2018] UKUT 244. In the circumstances, and
despite a lengthy recitation of evidence in his decision, we conclude that
the FtT had failed to make sufficient findings, or provide sufficient
reasons, in relation to EN's rebuttal of the presumption under section 72.
The FtT had also failed to make any findings or state any conclusions in
relation to EN's refugee status, noting that even if he had not rebutted
the presumption under section 72, EN was entitled to know whether his
Refugee Convention status had ceased.

Decision on appellant's appeal - error of law

For the reasons set out above, we find that the FtT erred in his decision
in concluding that EN had not rebutted the presumption under section 72 of
the 2002 Act. The FtT made no decision on the issue of cessation of refugee
status, so that it remains incomplete.  The FtT's decision on EN's
protection claim is therefore unsafe and cannot stand.

We therefore set aside the FtT's decision on EN's appeal against the
section 72 decision and the cessation of protection status decision.

Remaking

We agreed with the parties' representatives that it was appropriate for us
to remake EN's appeals on the two issues, rather than to remit them to the
First-tier Tribunal to remake.  It was unnecessary for us to hear any live
evidence and instead we were able to consider the detailed submissions and
the extensive evidence in EN's bundle which had previously been considered
by the FtT, as well as an OASys Report.

The section 72 issue

The burden is on EN to rebut the presumption that he constitutes a danger
to the community of the UK.  Section 72 of the 2002 Act reflects the UK's
implementation article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.  In that context,
the overall burden is for the Secretary of State to demonstrate that
refoulement is permissible, albeit the rebuttable presumption has been
implemented in section 72.

There is no dispute that EN had been convicted of a particularly serious
crime, which in EN's case was for the possession of, with intent to supply,
'class-A' drugs, namely heroin and crack cocaine, for which he was given
three years' concurrent sentences of imprisonment on 26 November 2015.  At
the date of that conviction, that was the latest in a history of EN's
offending, which included: robbery; burglary; theft; and possession of a
knife in 2012; further convictions for possession of a knife; resisting or
obstructing a constable; and possession of cannabis in 2013; and in 2014,
failing to comply with a detention and training order.  Following EN's
subsequent release from prison in September 2016, he was most recently
convicted of possession of cocaine and cannabis on 15 February 2019 for
which he was fined, rather than given a further prison sentence.  It was
said by EN's representatives that the 2019 offence amounted to a "blip" in
his rehabilitation.

The FtT had, in his decision, recorded much of the evidence in respect of
the issue of whether EN constitutes a danger to the community of the UK. In
particular, he noted the evidence of Victoria Ing, a social worker with
Southwark LBC Youth Offending Service; Mavis Daley, former foster mother of
EN; and Charles Lee, a key worker for Cornerstone Care Partnerships
Limited, contracted by Southwark LBC Social Services, who had worked with
EN since his release from Feltham Young Offenders Institute in September
2016.  We should add that there is substantially greater evidence than what
we have referred to, but we have nevertheless considered all the evidence
before us.  The honesty and professionalism of the witnesses who gave
evidence in support of EN, to whom we have already referred, was
unchallenged in the FtT hearing and there was no challenge to their
evidence before us.

Ms Daley, EN's former foster mother, described EN's early upbringing in the
UK, following his departure from Cameroon, as highly traumatic.  Whilst she
had not recognised him as suffering from any mental health issues, she
referred to his brother having been murdered in September 2012, which had
traumatised him, as well as the physical cruelty to which he has been
subjected by his father.  She, along with the other witnesses and his
current partner, described the positive role that EN played in looking
after his young son and the fact that the birth of his son had brought
stability into EN's life following his period of imprisonment.  Whilst EN
was a non-resident father, he saw his son on a regular basis and Ms Daley
was in regular contact with EN and regarded him as a member of her family
and continued to provide him with support.

Ms Ing, a qualified social worker, who had ceased supervising EN
professionally in August 2014, nevertheless had continued to provide him
with support on a voluntary basis ever since, describing him as having
maturing interests including an awareness of politics and describing EN as
having a good relationship with his partner, and the partner's sister; and
that their son has a positive home life.  Ms Ing found him to be physically
and mentally in a better position than she had previously observed,
notwithstanding his recent arrest in February 2019 for the possession of
cocaine and cannabis. She believed that whilst there might be some risk of
low level re-offending, she was frequently required to make professional
risk assessments on individuals and believed that following the recent
birth of his son, there had been a "radical shift" in EN, with a change of
demeanour. EN was calmer and happier, and she had been "genuinely shocked"
as everything about EN was now positive.

Charles Lee had worked with EN since his release from Feltham in September
2016.  He saw him on a weekly basis for about six hours each week, helping
EN to manage his own life.  Mr Lee described the birth of EN's son and EN's
ongoing relationship with the child's mother as positive factors and that
both relationships had calmed EN.  Mr Lee was recorded by the FtT as
stating:

         "Having become a father has totally changed [EN].  I would say that
         if he was 5% positive before, he is now 75% positive.  His attitude
         to life has changed.  He is very intent on keeping his son safe and
         bringing him up well."

Mr Lee described the initial difficulties with which EN had had to cope on
his release from prison in 2016, with no bank account or access to benefits
and EN had nevertheless been able to establish a basic stability, despite
the 'limbo' in which he had been placed.  Mr Lee described being 'amazed'
at the change of attitude in EN, who had a motivation and a purpose in
life.

In addition to the evidence of those who had worked with EN over a
significant period of time following his release, we also considered the
OASys assessment which was carried out on 18 August 2016 and which
described EN as presenting a 'medium' risk to the community. The report
defined that term as indicating that an offender had a potential to cause
serious harm but was unlikely to do so unless there was a change of
circumstances, for example a failure to take medication, loss of
accommodation, relationship breakdown, or drug or alcohol misuse.  The
report identified EN's previous willingness to a change and improvement in
his attitude, albeit his good intentions could be short-lived, as indicated
by the index offence.  We were also conscious that other than the offence
of which EN was arrested in February 2019, which was for possession rather
than supply of drugs, the risks of reoffending within two years, i.e. by
August 2018, were ones which EN in fact had positively exceeded. The report
had assessed EN as having a 53% chance of reoffending within the two-year
period, during which he did not in fact re-offend.

Taking into account all of the evidence, including the evidence of
professional social workers who had worked with EN for long periods of time
and could be expected to provide objective views; and whose expertise and
honesty was not questioned, we conclude that EN has rebutted the
presumption that he continues to constitute a danger to the community of
the UK.  On the one hand, the seriousness of his 2015 offence should not be
understated; it is in the context of a significant offending history; and
was identified in the OASys report of 2016 as a potential risk factor in
subsequent reoffending. On the other hand, we considered the fact that EN
was not subsequently reconvicted of an offence until February 2019; and
when he did reoffend, this was of a different, lesser magnitude of
seriousness, as reflected in the non-custodial sentence, of fines for
possession of cocaine of �125 and �83 for possession of cannabis.  Coupled
with the powerful evidence of Ms Ing and Mr Lee as to the real changes that
they have witnessed in EN, we conclude that EN has discharged the
presumption that he constitutes a risk.  Had his reoffending been for a
different offence, such as for violence, possession of a knife; or
possession with intent to supply, that would have been a different matter.


Decision - section 72

In the context of the presumption in section 72 having been rebutted, we
remake the decision that his appeal succeeds on the section 72 issue, with
the consequence that we are not obliged to dismiss his appeal by reference
to section 72(10) of the 2002 Act.

The cessation issue

We went on to consider whether, for the purposes of section 33 of the UK
Borders Act 2007, EN's removal pursuant to a deportation order would breach
his Convention rights and in particular whether his status can be revoked
on cessation grounds.  In making this assessment, we were conscious that EN
had been granted indefinite leave to remain, following his unlawful entry
to the UK in 2002, and the grant of refugee status was to his father, with
his grant of leave being made as the minor dependent child of his father,
from whom he was estranged.  For EN's appeal to succeed, he must prove, to
the lower standard, an individual or personal well-founded fear of
persecution, not one derived from or dependent upon another person: see
SSHD v JS (Uganda) [2019] EWCA Civ 1670. We needed to consider EN's
circumstances in a broad and general sense, covering both his relationship
with his father and the circumstances in connection with which his father
had been granted refugee status and the risks to him arising from his
political affiliations; as well as the linked personal risks to EN and the
extent to which that led EN personally to have a well-founded fear of
persecution.

EN's father had been granted refugee status as a prominent anti-government
activist, who opposed the regime of President Biya in Cameroon in the
1990s.  The father's claim had previously been the subject of Tribunal
determinations, including by Adjudicator McKee, as he then was, in a
decision promulgated on 12 August 2002. In the 2002 decision, Adjudicator
McKee accepted that EN's father had been an activist with the Social
Democratic Front, or 'SDF', in opposition to the Cameroon government and
his 'sur place' activities were of sufficient prominence to result in him
being elected as Vice Chairman of the SDF London branch on fleeing to the
United Kingdom.  His prominence had attracted newspaper coverage in the
'Independent on Sunday' newspaper on 5 August 2001, which had come to the
attention of the Cameroonian High Commission.  Adjudicator McKee did not
regard his sur place activities as contrived.  Whilst a previous asylum
claim had been unsuccessful, Adjudicator McKee assessed EN as a wholly
credible witness. In granting the asylum claim, Adjudicator McKee noted the
significant risks to opponents of the Biya regime of serious ill-treatment,
where prison conditions were appalling.

It was in this context that we also considered the expert report of Dr
Charlotte Walker-Said, produced on 4 May 2018, in relation to the risks to
EN, were he to be returned to Cameroon.  Her expertise was unchallenged by
the Secretary of State.  In providing her report she had considered the
Secretary of State's representations as well as the UNHCR letter opposing a
possible revocation of EN's refugee status.  She testified as to the risk
that EN would face on the basis of his father's prominence in opposition
politics with resulting risks to family members, despite the period of time
since EN's father's departure from Cameroon, said to be in February 1997;
and EN's departure from Cameroon with his step-mother, and his entry to the
UK in June 2002; and despite the fact that EN is estranged from his father,
bearing in mind the Biya government's perception of even relatives of
opposition activists as 'enemies of the state'.  The SDF continued to be
prominent in anti-government opposition to the Biya government and the
level of conflict between the authorities and opposition groups remained
high, particularly in the context of the government's suppression of
Anglophone groups, which provide significant support to the SDF,  Dr Walker-
Said assessed the risks to EN as being particularly significant by
reference to the following factors: the significant repression by the
Cameroonian authorities of SDF dissent; EN's perceived familial links to
his father; and as someone returning to Cameroon without a family or social
network support, leading to the risk of destitution and homelessness, which
in turn would exacerbate the risk of identification by the Cameroonian
authorities and subsequent ill-treatment.  EN's father's long-time
membership of the SDF; his father's continuing statements online
criticising the Biya regime; EN's likely social isolation in Cameroon and
his Anglophone identity would mean that it was likely that he would be seen
as a subversive, even setting aside the issue of EN's mental health
vulnerabilities.  Dr Walker-Said concluded that EN would be very likely to
be placed in a "highly dangerous situation", were he returned to Cameroon.
He would "likely be a victim of police and security force abuse."

We noted that there was nothing in the wider objective evidence to dispel
the fears identified by Dr Walker-Said, with recent reports in June and
October 2018 (Amnesty International and the FCO) referring to a clampdown
on any form of dissent and deteriorating situation in Anglophone regions as
well as a Human Rights Watch Report of 6 May 2019 which referred to endemic
torture and state actors using torture and other ill-treatment of suspects
to confess to crimes or humiliate and punish them.

In the circumstances, we have no hesitation that EN has demonstrated a well-
founded fear of persecution based on imputed political opposition to the
current government of Cameroon, arising from his perceived links to his
father, a prominent SDF activist; as well as his own personal
circumstances, as an Anglophone speaker, with no support network in
Cameroon. The circumstances in connection with which his father was
recognised as a refugee have not ceased to exist; and while that fear of
persecution was recognised, in 2002, in respect of his father alone, EN
nevertheless has also demonstrated a well-founded fear of persecution in
his own right.

Decision - cessation

We therefore remake the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the cessation
issue by allowing EN's appeal.  Revocation of his protection status would
result in the UK breaching its obligations under the Refugee Convention.


Signed   J Keith                        Date     4 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
FEE AWARD

While EN's appeal has succeeded, no appeal fee was paid and therefore  there
can be no fee award.


Signed   J Keith                        Date     4 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

