

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/00084/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 August 2016                      |On 12 August 2016                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS NIMAT  SALIH

                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen  (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State for
the Home Department (hereinafter "the Secretary of State").  The respondent
is Mrs Nimat Salih (hereinafter "the claimant").  The Secretary of State
has appealed to the Upper Tribunal, with permission, against a decision of
the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Heynes hereinafter "the Judge") to allow the
claimant's appeal against a decision of an entry clearance officer of
18 December 2014 refusing to grant her entry clearance to come to the UK as
a visitor.

2.    It is necessary to set out something of the factual background to
this slightly unusual case.  The claimant is a national of Sudan and was
born on 1 January 1954.  She made her application for entry clearance on
12 November 2014.  One of her adult daughters, also a national of Sudan,
applied at the same time. However, that daughter was refused entry
clearance and was not successful on appeal. She has not played any part in
these proceedings before the Upper Tribunal.  Returning to the claimant's
own situation, she had indicated, when seeking entry clearance, that the
purpose of the proposed visit was for her to be assessed as a kidney donor
and, if satisfactorily assessed, for the relevant operation to take place.
The proposed recipient of her kidney was to be another adult daughter (the
sponsor) who is based in the UK.  There was some medical evidence in the
form of a letter written by a consultant nephrologist of 7 March 2016,
indicating that the sponsor was receiving home haemodialysis treatment
which was said to require "a tremendous amount of dedication and effort" on
her part and which, as I understand it, caused a greater risk of infection
and of cardiovascular problems than was applicable to the general populace.
 It was also said that the quality of life someone on dialysis "is not the
same as someone not on dialysis, and typically has been compared to someone
with advanced cancer".  So, it was thought a kidney transplant was a better
option than the sponsor continuing with things as they were.  The medical
evidence did not, though, suggest that the lack of a transplant would be
fatal in the short term and it was mentioned in the letter that experts in
the United States of America considered that for someone of the sponsor's
age "life expectancy on dialysis would be around 10ï¿½ years".

3.    The entry clearance officer had considered the application under
paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules (which relates to general visitors)
but had refused it because he was not satisfied that the claimant was
genuinely seeking entry as a visitor or that she intended to leave the UK
at the end of the visit or that she would be able to maintain and
accommodate herself in the UK and meet the cost of her return travel.  The
entry clearance officer's main concern, it is fair to say, was what was
perceived to be inconsistency regarding the claimant's date of birth.  She
had, in her application, submitted a Sudanese passport which had been
issued in 2014 and which indicated a date of birth of 1 January 1954.
However, it was said that records showed that she had previously been
issued entry clearance having indicated a date of birth of 15 January 1959.


4.    The claimant's appeal, alongside that of the adult daughter who was
ultimately unsuccessful, was considered by way of an oral hearing which
took place on 4 November 2015.  Both parties were represented and the
sponsor gave oral evidence.  As to the medical aspects the Judge said this:

      "     14.  The medical evidence is not in dispute and can be dealt
      with succinctly.  The sponsor had a renal transplant in 2004.  This is
      now failing and she has had to return to dialysis.  She is on the
      waiting list for a kidney.  Tests carried out in Sudan showed that the
      first appellant appears on the basis of 'preliminary medical
      information' to be a potential donor.  Further assessments in the
      United Kingdom would be needed to establish the first appellant's
      suitability.  According to a letter dated 2 January 2015 from the
      Living Donor Transplant Co-ordinator (B26; appellant's bundle) medical
      assessment and, if it were to proceed, surgery will need careful
      planning if they are to be completed within six months.  According to
      an earlier letter (B11), the first appellant will need to recover for
      up to four weeks after surgery.

            15.  Without another transplant, the sponsor's health will
      deteriorate.  I find as a fact that the first appellant may prove to
      be a suitable donor but that transplant surgery will be undertaken
      only if further assessments confirm that she is so.  In that event,
      the first appellant would be remaining in the United Kingdom for at
      least six months."

5.    The Judge then went on to find that the appellant had been born on
1 January 1954, as she had currently claimed, but that the explanation she
had given for the inconsistency regarding her date of birth had been
unpersuasive.  He also found some documentary evidence concerning her
claimed employment in Sudan to be unpersuasive as well.  He considered that
the entry clearance officer had been correct in refusing the application
under the Immigration Rules and explained his view about that in this way:

      "     23.  I find that both applications were rightly refused under
    the Immigration Rules, not least because the intention of the
    appellants was to remain in the United Kingdom for whatever length of
    time was involved in medical assessments and, if it were to take place,
    surgery and recuperation which would be completed within six months
    only with careful planning.  Neither appellant intended to return at
    the end of the period cited by them."

6.    Pausing there, it seems the Judge was not concerned that the claimant
might seek to stay in the UK permanently but rather, that she would stay
longer than six months ( the normal period given for a person seeking to
visit family) if the operation and recovery period meant that were
necessary.  The Judge, despite his view as to the Immigration Rules, went
on to allow the appeal.  He did so because he found that the claimant was,
in the particular circumstances applicable, able to successfully rely upon
Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) in explaining
that, he said this:

      "     25.  In relation to human rights, the submission of Mr Shah
      [who was the appellant's representative before the Judge] may be put
      simply:  given the medical evidence the human rights case was
      overwhelming.  Mr McBirnie [the Home Office Presenting Officer]
      submitted that there was no breach of Article 8.

            26.  In relation to the first appellant, I find that the
      medical evidence is sufficient to justify a consideration of Article 8
      outside the rules.  The decision of the ECO did amount to an
      interference with the development of family life as between the first
      appellant and her daughter and so the matter is one of
      proportionality.  The respondent has a duty to maintain immigration
      control for, amongst other things, the economic well-being of the
      country.  There are legitimate concerns in terms of immigration
      control surrounding the application of the first appellant; the
      discrepancy over her age and the previous use of a passport and an
      entry clearance application in which allegedly wrong information was
      provided, her intention to remain considerably longer than the period
      cited on her application and the reliability of evidence of
      employment.  These are serious matters but, nevertheless, I find that
      it would be disproportionate not to allow the first appellant to come
      to this country for the purpose of undertaking further assessment to
      establish whether she is a suitable donor for the sponsor.  It is a
      matter for the respondent to determine how much discretionary leave
      might be given for this purpose and to what extent further leave may
      be necessary if it transpires that surgery is to go ahead."

7.    The appeal, then, succeeded on human rights grounds only.  That was
not the end of the matter because the Secretary of State applied for
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal contending that the Judge had
erred in wrongly or impermissibly concluding that the "legitimate concerns"
he had identified coupled with the necessity to maintain immigration
control had been outweighed and that he had also erred in failing to give
sufficient weight to the public interest given that the claimant had only
considered to be "a potential match as a donor".  I would observe, at this
stage, that those grounds look very much like a mere disagreement with the
Judge's findings and conclusions as to Article 8.

8.    Permission was initially refused by a judge of the First-
tier Tribunal who expressed the view that the Judge had been entitled to
find the existence of family life, and had had proper regard for the
respondent's duties and interests but had permissibly concluded that, on
the facts, the respondent's concerns were outweighed.  A judge of the
Upper Tribunal, however, granted permission to appeal and noted, in so
doing, that on 6 November 2014 (and therefore six days prior to the entry
clearance application having been made) there had been an amendment to the
Immigration Rules to specifically allow persons seeking entry to be
assessed as potential donors or to donate an organ to apply for entry as a
visitor and introducing relevant criteria.  Pausing there, it does not
appear that the claimant had known of that amendment. The entry clearance
officer may have done but did not mention it. Nor does it appear that the
amendment was specifically brought to the attention of the Judge.  The
granting judge made these observations:

      "The sponsor is a British citizen who is receiving care within the
      NHS.  It is accepted there is a shortage of donors in the UK but the
      sponsor has received a kidney in the past and, one assumes, is on the
      transplant list.  It has not been shown she will not receive a
      compatible organ if one becomes available and she is the next in line.
       There is no evidence confirming the suitability of the appellant as a
      suitable donor and the medical evidence does not support the claim
      that admission to the UK is essential at this time as the sponsors own
      medical evidence suggests a 10ï¿½ year life expectancy on the dialysis
      she is currently receiving.  The evidence may not show that Articles 3
      or 8 are engaged in relation to the sponsor.  N v The UK [2008] 47
      EHRR 39 considered.

      Article 8 does not permit a person to circumvent the Rules and the
      Court of Appeal recently provided guidance in the case of Secretary of
      State for the Home Department v SS (Congo)
            [2015] EWCA Civ 387 in relation to the assessment of Article 8
      claims.  It has not been shown on the available evidence that
      sufficiently compelling circumstances exist (which are not
      sufficiently recognised under the Rules) to require the grant of such
      leave.  The requirements of section 117 were not considered by
      the Judge, despite the hearing being after 28 July 2014, and it has
      not been shown they can be met, which needed to be considered as part
      of the overall balancing exercise.

      The Judge sets out a number of considerations at [26], described as
      legitimate concerns but found the decision proportionate.  It is
      arguable the Judge has erred for the reasons set out in the
      application in relation to the assessment of the human rights element
      of the claim.  Whilst the sponsors need for a kidney transplant is
      accepted, mere sympathy is not a good reason for allowing an appeal on
      Article 8 grounds - see MG (Serbia and Montenegro) [2005] UKAIT 00113
      in which the tribunal stated that sympathy for an individual did not
      enhance a person's rights under Article 8."

9.    The granting judge did observe that it might be thought the claimant
ought to consider making a fresh application if she could satisfy the new
requirements of the Immigration Rules concerning organ donors.

10.   Permission having been granted there was an oral hearing before the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that consideration could be given as to
whether or not the Judge had erred in law and, if he had, what should flow
from that.  Mrs Pettersen represented the Secretary of State at that
hearing.  There was no attendance on behalf of the claimant and no
representative for the claimant.  The sponsor was not in attendance.
Mrs Pettersen submitted that the Judge had erred in failing to consider the
correct Immigration Rules (through not having considered the amended rules
concerning organ donors) and had impermissibly sought to use Article 8 as
"a general dispensing provision".

11.   The Secretary of State, in seeking permission to appeal, had relied
upon the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Kaur (Visit Appeals; Article 8)
[2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC).  It had been stated, therein, that whilst, with
respect to visitors, there was now only an appeal on human rights grounds
the starting point would, nevertheless, be the state of the evidence about
a claimant's ability to meet the requirements of the relevant
Immigration Rules.  It was said that, accordingly, judges were not relieved
of their ordinary duties of fact finding.  As to Article 8 ECHR arguments,
it was stressed that unless a claimant could show that there were
particular interests at stake covered by Article 8 which were "of a
particularly pressing nature" so as to give rise to "a strong claim that
compelling circumstances may exist to justify" a grant of leave to enter
outside the Rules, the claimant was exceedingly unlikely to succeed.  It
was said that that proposition did hold good in visitor appeals.

12.   Paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules sets out the requirements which
must be met by a person seeking leave to enter the UK as a general visitor.
 It has application to persons who are coming to the UK for, amongst other
things, to visit family.  As noted above, this application was refused
because the entry clearance officer considered that the requirements of
paragraph 41 had not been met.  As the granting judge pointed out, though,
there is now also paragraph 41A which governs the requirements to be met by
a person seeking leave to enter the United Kingdom as a general visitor who
is acting as an organ donor or is to be assessed as a suitable organ donor.
 It is to be noted that the requirements in paragraph 41A are in addition
to the requirements appearing at paragraph 41, rather than a replacement
for them, so that if a claimant satisfies all of 41A but does not satisfy
an element of 41 he/she will still not succeed.  Similarly, a claimant who
satisfies all of 41 but not all elements of 41A will not succeed either.

13.   The entry clearance officer did only rely upon the requirements of
paragraph 41 when refusing entry clearance.  That does not mean, though, of
itself, that the entry clearance officer was unaware of paragraph 41A.  It
might simply have been the case that the entry clearance officer had
concluded that since the requirements of paragraph 41 were met there would
be no purpose in going on to consider the requirements of paragraph 41A.
The wording of the refusal does not preclude that interpretation.

14.      When the appeal came before the Judge, the argument under the
Rules revolved around the requirements of paragraph 41.  It seems to me
that the Home Office Presenting Officer can be taken to have been aware of
the potentially applicable Immigration Rules.  Nevertheless, the
Home Office Presenting Officer did not assert that any of the requirements
of paragraph 41A were not met and so, understandably and it seems to me
appropriately in the circumstances, the Judge limited his consideration of
the appeal under the Rules to the aspects which had been placed in issue
and which, as it happens, were all contained within paragraph 41.  Against
that background it seems to me I cannot conclude that the Judge erred in
failing to give specific consideration to the requirements of
paragraph 41A.

15.   The Judge did not fall foul of what had been said in the decision of
the Upper Tribunal in Kaur, cited above, with respect to the need to make
findings regarding the Immigration Rules.  He made findings to the effect
that the requirements of paragraph 41 (the only paragraph placed in issue
before him) were not met, seemingly, because he thought that if the
claimant had turned out to be a suitable donor and if the operation had
taken place and if she needed time to recover, it was likely she would
exceed the permitted length of stay which would be to a maximum of six
months.  Nevertheless, said the Judge, the appeal fell to be allowed under
Article 8.

16.   In turning to the Article 8 aspect of the decision, I remind myself
of my view that the actual grounds relied upon by the Secretary of State
appeared to represent disagreement with the outcome.  The Judge, although
he did not expressly say so, had clearly found that there was family life
between the claimant and the sponsor.  Given that they are mother and
daughter that might not be thought to be surprising and, in any event, no
challenge at all was made in the grounds to that aspect.  Nor does it
appear that the Secretary of State was seeking to challenge the Judge's
conclusion that the decision to refuse entry clearance had constituted an
interference with the right to respect for family life (although the Judge
did not put it exactly in that way).  Instead, the challenge relates to
the Judge's view as to proportionality.  In that context I note the
granting judge's reference to the need for sufficiently compelling
circumstances to be shown before an appeal can succeed under Article 8 and
I also note what was said in Kaur to that effect and which I have
summarised above.

17.   The Judge did not specifically remind himself of the need for
compelling circumstances.  However, the mere fact that he did not refer to
that does not mean he did not have the requirement in mind.  It seems to me
implicit in what was said at paragraphs 25 and 26 of the determination that
the Judge appreciated there had to be considerations of particular force
and that he took the view that, here, given the circumstances, there were.
It does not seem to me it can be said, as the grounds contend, that
the Judge disregarded the requirements of immigration control.  He
expressly referred to immigration control in the context of his concerns
about the situation under the Immigration Rules at paragraph 26 of his
determination.  So, he was aware of and took into account public interest
considerations linked to that.  It is true he did not refer to the
considerations set out at section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002 (as inserted by section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014) but
in looking at those requirements it seems to me that they relate largely to
the situation of persons already in the UK and/or persons intending to come
to the UK for settlement.  Against that background it does not seem to me
that the Judge was required, as a matter of law, to refer to section 117 or
to go through, in terms, its specific requirements.

18.      The question of proportionality was a matter for the Judge and it
is clear that he attached weight to the medical circumstances.  Whilst I
note the granting judge did refer to evidence suggesting that matters were
not pressing, given the life expectancy on dialysis, the letter of the
consultant nephrologist referred to above had highlighted ongoing
difficulties for the sponsor, of some significance as a direct consequence
of having to be on regular dialysis and the Judge was plainly entitled, in
my view to take those sorts of matters into account when assessing
proportionality.

19.   It does seem to me that the Judge's Article 8 assessment might be
said to be briefer than what would have been ideal.  Further, it does seem
to me that, on one view at least, it might be thought that the Judge's
ultimate decision was a somewhat generous one.  However, none of that, of
itself, demonstrates that he has erred in law.  I conclude that he has not.
 Accordingly, therefore, I conclude that his decision shall stand.

20.   It may be, of course, that this decision does not benefit the
claimant.  It is possible, as Mrs Pettersen suggested at the hearing might
have happened, that she has taken the suggestion contained in the grant and
has made an application with specific reference to the requirements of
paragraph 41A.  Perhaps, if she has that application has succeeded. That
might explain the absence of the sponsor or a representative at the hearing
before me.  Perhaps another suitable donor has been

found.  So, circumstances have changed such that the granting of a Visa is
not now appropriate despite the claimant's success in appealing.
Nevertheless, the claimant does succeed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an
error of law.  That decision shall stand.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.

Signed:                           Date: 12/08/2016


M R Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award


Signed:                           Date:

M R Hemingway

