

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
VA/03047/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2017                    |On 19 December 2017                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             MR. MD MOHSIN MIAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Karim, counsel instructed by Kalam solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
Bangladesh, born on 17 January 1960. On 30 January 2013, he applied for
entry clearance for 1 month as a visitor. This application was refused in a
decision dated 6 March 2013. The Claimant appealed and on 8 September 2014
the Entry Clearance Officer withdrew the decision. On 12 June 2015, the
Entry Clearance Officer made a further refusal decision and the Claimant
appealed against this.

2. The basis of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision was that the
Claimant was fingerprinted at Heathrow airport on 18 January 2008 and
refused entry to the UK on the basis that the passport [
] containing a Canadian permanent resident visa contained a substituted bio-
data page and in his subsequent application for entry clearance he made
false representations and failed to disclose material facts in that he
declared he had never been refused entry on arrival to the UK or had been
otherwise required to leave the UK in the last ten years. The application
for a visit visa was consequently refused with reference to paragraph
320(7A) and 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules. It was further asserted that
this seriously damaged the credibility of his application for entry
clearance and the application was further refused with reference to
paragraph 41 of the Rules

3. His appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Pears for hearing on 30
November 2016. At the hearing, the Presenting Officer sought to file
material which had not previously been served on the Claimant or the
Tribunal, despite the fact that three notices had been sent requiring the
ECO to file evidence in advance. The Judge also refused a request by the
Presenting Officer for an adjournment, for the same reason and given that
the Claimant made his application in January 2013 and the appeal had been
pending since mid 2015.

4. In a decision promulgated on 8 December 2016, the Judge allowed the
appeal, on the basis that the Entry Clearance Officer failed to provide a
document verification report or any evidence to show that the passport [
               ] was not genuine and the Claimant had produced evidence
from the Bangladeshi High Commission stating that it was genuine [27]. The
Judge found on the balance of probabilities that the Claimant had not used
a document with a false date of birth [28]. The Claimant denied being
refused entry to the UK and stated that he was a transit passenger and was
never refused entry and therefore had not made any false declaration which
, the Judge accepted [29]. The Judge found that the Entry Clearance Officer
had failed to discharge the legal or evidential burden of proof and that
paragraphs 320(7A) and (7B) were not applicable [31] and went on to find
that the Claimant met the requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration
Rules [32].



5. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal on the basis that there had been procedural unfairness in that
their bundle had been sent to HMCTS on 18 November 2016 and had been
received on Arnhem House on 22 November 2016 but had not been placed on the
Tribunal's file for consideration at the hearing. Permission to appeal was
granted by First tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison in a decision dated 20
September 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that had the Entry
Clearance Officer's bundle been received it may have made a material
difference to the outcome or to the fairness of the proceedings.

Hearing

6. At the hearing before me, neither party were in possession of the bundle
that had been served by the Entry Clearance Officer in advance of the
hearing before the First tier Tribunal. However, a copy of this bundle was
on the Tribunal file, therefore, I had it copied for the parties and gave
Mr Melvin the opportunity to consider it.

7. In his submissions, Mr Melvin asserted that clearly the documents
missing from the First tier Tribunal hearing were capable of making a
significant difference to the outcome of the appeal. He submitted that
there was extensive evidence of circumstances in which the Claimant should
have been removed to Malaysia, including the flight number and the IS 125
and the Judge would have needed significant answers to that evidence,
including the fact the Claimant had been refused boarding by Air Canada as
they believed he was travelling on a forged document. The Judge's findings
from [27] on are based on fact the Entry Clearance Officer has not produced
any documents relating to this evidence, which was why the appeal was
allowed.

8. In his submissions, Mr Karim stated that there was no DVR before the
Judge and that, in any event, the issuing authority have confirmed that it
is a genuine document: page 16 of the Appellant's bundle, which also notes
that the passport number tallies with the passport number given in the
refusal letter. He submitted that this finding can be left intact. In
respect of the fact that the Claimant was apparently refused entry to the
United Kingdom in 2008, Mr Karim submitted that the evidence pertaining to
that is, at best, confusing. The IS128A refers to the Claimant with an
incorrect date of birth (19.1.60) rather than 17.1.60 and this is confirmed
by the refusal decisions. The Claimant's name as there recorded viz Mohd
Mohsin Miah, is also wrong.  Mr Karim also pointed out that the IS 128A
refers to arrival on 17.1.08 and refusal 18.1.08 but the IS 125
(refusal/cancellation of leave to enter/remain) is dated 7.4.08 so post
dates the refusal of leave to enter by some months and so clearly could not
have been handed to the Claimant on the day of the refusal. It was Mr
Karim's case that it was a different person and not the Claimant who was
refused entry to the United Kingdom in 2008.

9. Mr Karim submitted that the second issue in the refusal is that the
Claimant deliberately deceived the authorities by not mentioned that he had
been refused entry into the UK, however, this was not the case. On any view
the Claimant, if it was him, was a transit passenger and was not served
with the refusal in any event. He had a 10 year multiple entry visit visa.
The only reason he was refused was because of his bio-data page which has
subsequently been confirmed as genuine thus this issue is extinguished by
letter from the High Commission. In respect of the context, Mr Karim
submitted that the Claimant was seeking to transit the UK en route to
Canada and had visited the UK 6 times and stayed for no more than 28 days
on any of those occasions. He earns the equivalent of �16k a month in
Bangladesh and has invested �2 million in Canada and is Mayor of his local
area in Bangladesh. He submitted that it was difficult to see how a
reasonable Tribunal could have reached a different conclusion and there
would have been no material difference had the Judge considered this
evidence. There was an explanation set out in the Claimant's affidavit and
this was before the Judge and the Claimant's sponsor and her husband gave
evidence.

10. In the alternative, if this was not accepted then there has to be a
resumed hearing because this evidence has never been seen by his lay or
professional client.

11. In his reply, Mr Melvin asserted in respect of the letter purportedly
from the Bangladeshi High Commission in Kuala Lumpur, that the issue was
that the bio-data was incorrect and this is not addressed. He submitted
that the Claimant's representative was trying to muddy the waters and it is
clear that it is the same person, despite the difference in spelling of
names and slightly different date of birth. Mr Melvin submitted that the
reasons given in the refusal decision have not been addressed by the
Claimant at all: there is no denial by the Claimant but simply a statement
that the reasons advanced by the Entry Clearance Officer are not sufficient
to justify the refusal. These reasons must have been put to the Claimant as
this was the issue under appeal. As for the point in respect of the
Immigration Officer's letter dated 7.4.08 [IS125] he failed to see how this
is significant or relevant. Mr Melvin submitted that the reasons provided
had not been addressed and that the documents could have made a significant
difference and the appeal should be heard by the First tier Tribunal.

Decision

12. The basis of the application for permission to appeal by the Entry
Clearance Officer is that the decision of the First tier Tribunal was
procedurally unfair, in light of the fact that the evidence upon which she
sought to rely had, in fact, been served on the First tier Tribunal but due
to administrative error, was not before the First tier Tribunal Judge at
the time of the hearing.

13. I accept that the decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge is
potentially vitiated by procedural unfairness. The question is whether the
evidence upon which the Entry Clearance Officer wished to rely would have
made a material difference to the outcome of the appeal. On that basis I
have given close consideration to that evidence. Of particular note is a
witness statement from John Roberts, a fingerprint expert for 36 years,
dated 15 November 2016 in which he states that the fingerprints taken from
the Claimant in Dhaka on 30 January 2013 and those taken from Miah M Mohsin
(DOB 19.1.60) on 18 January 2008 at Heathrow left him in no doubt that they
were made by the same person. Consequently, I find that the Claimant's
fingerprints were taken at Heathrow on 18 January 2008 and he was refused
entry as a transit passenger on that date as the IS128A, IS 125 and IS 83
make clear. The basis for that refusal was that he was refused boarding by
Air Canada as they believed he was travelling on a forged document and when
his passport was examined by the duty forgery officer it was confirmed that
his passport had contained a substituted bio data page. When interviewed,
the Claimant insisted that the passport was genuinely issued to him in
Bangladesh.

14. Notably, there is no DVR or evidence from the duty forgery officer
containing his findings and reasons as to why it was considered that the
bio data page had been substituted. Thus the Upper Tribunal is no better
position than the First tier Tribunal in this respect and there is no
reason to overturn the finding by the First tier Tribunal Judge at [27],
having heard from the Sponsor and considered the evidence in the
Appellant's bundle, that the Claimant's passport was genuine.

15. At [29] of his decision, the First tier Tribunal Judge relied upon the
absence of supporting evidence from the Entry Clearance Officer and the
evidence of the Claimant that he was a transit passenger and was never
refused entry and therefore has not made any false declaration. The
evidence now before the Upper Tribunal shows that the Claimant was refused
leave to enter the United Kingdom as a transit passenger on 18 January
2008. The Judge went on at [30] to find that given that the Respondent had
the passport at the material time and it was declared to the immigration
authorities, there was no dishonesty and consequently the Respondent failed
to discharge the burden of proof in respect of paragraphs 320(7A) and (7B)
of the Rules [31].

16. These paragraphs provide inter alia:

"(7A) where false representations have been made or false documents or
information have been submitted (whether or not material to the
application, and whether or not to the applicant's knowledge), or material
facts have not been disclosed, in relation to the application or in order
to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a third party required
in support of the application.

(7B) where the applicant has previously breached the UK's immigration laws
(and was 18 or over at the time of his most recent breach) by:
(a) Overstaying;
(b) breaching a condition attached to his leave;
(c) being an Illegal Entrant;
(d) using Deception in an application for entry clearance, leave to enter
or remain, or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a
third party required in support of the application (whether successful or
not)..."

17. In AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773, the Court of Appeal per Lord
Justie Rix held at [65]-[66] that the representations needed not only to be
false ie. incorrect, but to be dishonest.

18. The Claimant's explanation for his failure to disclose what had
happened at Heathrow on 18 January 2008 is set out in his attested witness
statement dated 28 August 2014, at pages 4-5 of the Appellant's bundle, in
which he states inter alia:

      "My flight to London Heathrow was a transit and I did not have the
intention   to go into the UK, so there is no explanation for the claim
that I was refused     entry or deported from the UK. I was never refused
entry or deported from       any country in the world including Canada. The
Entry Clearance Officer      claimed that my passport [                 ]
was forgery tested and a substituted bio     data page was found. However,
I did not provide any false information in my      passports or my visa
application. The certification of my passport that was   given by the
Bangladesh Embassy in Malaysia proves that I did not provide  any wrong
information. Therefore, the allegation that was imposed on me
regarding substituted bio data is not correct because it was already proved
      that my passport and information including my date of birth (17.1.60)
were  genuine. I did not mention about this passport at 2.7 of visa
application      because I do not presently hold passport and it was kept
at London Heathrow     immigration. I filled out the visa application by
myself and I did not get a   professional person to fill it out. The
probably there might have been a few    mistakes that had made in visa
application. As far as my knowledge, I did not     provide any false
information."

19. Whilst it is now clear that the Claimant was, in fact, refused entry to
the United Kingdom and, in effect, refused entry to Canada as Air Canada
refused to board him, it is also clear by virtue of the fact that the IS125
is dated 7 April 2008 that this was not served upon him contemporaneously
and thus I find that the First tier Tribunal Judge did not err in finding
an absence of dishonesty on the part of the Claimant. There was clearly
room for doubt in the Claimant's mind as to the events that had taken
place, given that he was not seeking entry to the United Kingdom but simply
to transit en route to Canada. Clearly it would have been desirable for the
Claimant to have mentioned at 2.7 of the visa application form that he had
also been the holder of passport number [                 ] that had been
retained by the UK Immigration Service on 18 January 2008. However, I find
that the First tier Tribunal Judge, having considered all the evidence
before him in the round, including the fact that the Claimant has been
granted a number of visas to the UK in the past and that he possesses
businesses and assets both in Canada, where he has permanent residence and
Bangladesh, did not err in finding that the Entry Clearance Officer had
failed to discharge the evidential and legal burden of proof, following his
previous finding that there was no dishonesty on the part of the Claimant.

20. Further, it would appear when all the evidence is considered in the
round, that in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, and given the
statement by the Bangladeshi authorities that the Claimant's passport [
              ] was genuinely issued, as they affirm at page 16 of the
Appellant's bundle, that it did not contain a substituted bio data page.
Consequently, there was no valid reason for the Claimant to have been
refused entry as a transit passenger to the UK nor for Air Canada to have
refused to board him in respect of his ongoing flight to Canada.

21. It follows that whilst the First tier Tribunal Judge did not have the
benefit of the evidence upon which the Entry Clearance Officer sought to
rely, I find that evidence would have made no difference to the outcome of
the appeal and thus any procedural unfairness was not material. I find no
material error of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Pears
and that decision and his finding that the Claimant meets the requirements
of paragraph 41 of the Rules, is upheld.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

18 December 2017
